
Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production
and Curriculum Research, Pune.Education Department’s Sanction Number :
Pra Shi Sa  / 2014  -15 / 2102  / Manjuri  / D - 505 / 755 Dated 4.2.2014
SHIVACHHATRAPATI
(ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES - PART TWO)
STANDARD FOUR

Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research, Pune - 411 004.
The Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research 
reserves all the rights relating to the book. No part of this  book  should be reproduced without the  written permission of  the Director, Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research, Pune.
Preface
 The ‘Primary Education Curriculum - 2012’ was prepared 
in the State of Maharashtra following the ‘Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009’ and the ‘National Curriculum Framework 2005’.  The syllabus is being 
implemented serially from the academic year 2013-2014.  
 The syllabus includes the subjects General Science, Civics and Geography under ‘Environmental Studies-Part 1’ from Standard III to Standard V. It specifies that  the subject History will be independent under ‘Environmental Studies-Part 2’.
 The Textbook Bureau has prepared this textbook for Std IV 
according to the syllabus approved by the State Government. 
 Our approach while designing this textbook was that the 
entire teaching-learning process should be child-centred, the method of self-study should receive more emphasis, at the end of Primary Education the students should have attained the desired competencies and the process of education in general should become enjoyable and interesting.
 This textbook attempts to present the inspiring history 
of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj in an easy and effective manner. The life and work of Shivaji Maharaj is a source of inspiration for the entire State of Maharashtra and the country. Many inspiring episodes related to his personality have been included here. This book was rewritten after properly screening the complaints and suggestions received from various social organizations, institutes and individuals. Also, some suitable changes were made where necessary. 
 The book scrutinized by many educationists and subject 
experts from all parts of the State to make it as flawless and standard as possible. The comments and suggestions received have been duly considered while finalizing the book. The History Subject Committee, the artist, and the photographer have taken great pains to prepare this book.The Bureau is thankful to all of them.
 We hope that this textbook will receive a warm welcome 
from students, parents and teachers.©
PuneDate : February 19, 2014(C.R.Borkar)
Director
Maharashtra State Bureau of
Textbook Production and
Curriculum Research, Pune.
History Subject Committee :
Dr A. H. Salunkhe, ChairmanDr Somnath Rode, MemberDr Neeraj Salunkhe, MemberShri Bapusaheb Shinde, MemberShri Mogal Jadhav, Member-Secretary
Co-ordination : 
Shri. Mogal JadhavSpecial Officer, History and Civics
Illustrations : Prof. Dilip Kadam, 
Shri. Devdatta Balkawade, Shri. Sanjay Shelar
Photographs : Shri. Pravin Bhonsale
Cartographers :  Shri Ravikiran Jadhav
Dr Neeraj Salunkhe
Translation : Prof. Pratap P. Shirole
Scrutiny : Dr Ganesh RautCo-ordination : Dhanavanti HardikarAcademic Secretary for LanguagesSantosh Pawar Assistant Special Officer, English
Production :
Sachchitanand Aphale, Chief Production OfficerPrabhakar Parab, Production OfficerShashank Kanikdale, Production Assistant
Typesetting :
DTP Section, Textbook Bureau, Pune
Paper : 70 GSM Creamwove
Print Order No. :Printer :
Publisher :
Shri. Vivek Uttam Gosavi, ControllerMaharashtra State Textbook Bureau,Sayani Road, Prabhadevi, Mumbai - 25.First Edition : 2014Revised Edition :September 2016Reprint : July 2018
N/PB/2019-20/1,00,000
M/S. IMPRINTS, THANE


The learner may be provided opportunities in 
pairs / groups / individually and encouraged to :
• ask questions and discuss with family members/elders as to why some family members stay together and others are away, interact with relatives, friends etc. and understand who stay at far off places, about the houses/ transport and life in their place of residence.
• frame the questions on the basis of experience and reflect it without any fear or hesitation.
• discuss with the parents/guardians/grandparents/elders in the neighbourhood and 
compare the life style of past and present and 
daily used items e.g. (clothes, vessels, nature of 
work, skills, games); inclusion of children with 
special skills, needs.
• role play based on events in Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj's life.
• find how to overcome problems with the help of courage, hard work and presence of mind through group discussion.
• develop an awareness regarding the conservation of environment, water literacy, equality and justice with the help of examples in the life of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. 
• participate in different cultural/national/environmental festivals/occasions organised in/at home/school/community, for example, morning or special assembly/ exhibition/ Diwali, Onam, Earth Day, Eid etc. Do creative  writing in events of celebrations, dance, drama, theatre, etc. (for example, diya/rangoli /kite 
making/ models of buildings/bridges etc. and sharing experiences through stories, poems, slogans, reports the events narration/creative writing (poem/story) or any other creative tasks.
• explore/read books, newspaper clippings, audio, stories / poems / pictures / videos/tactile /raised material/web resources/ library and any other resources besides textbooks.
• understanding the difference between the traditional and modern costumes.
• collecting information reagarding languages dialects, festivals and celebrations in the State.Suggested Pedagogical Processes Learning OutcomesEnglish Environmental Studies - Part 2 - Standard IV
The learner-
04.95B.01  identifies relationship with and 
among family members in extended 
family.
04.95B.02  voices opinion on issues observed/ 
experienced in family/ school/ 
neighbourhood for example, on stereotypes, discriminatory practices, child rights.
04.95B.03  participates actively and 
undertakes initiatives of care, share empathy, leadership by working together in groups for example, in different indoor/ outdoor/ local/ contemporary activities and games, carries out projects/ role play for taking care of a plant/s, feed birds/ animals, things/ elderly/ handicap.
04.95B.04  tells the thril ling incidences of 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s life/ personality.
04.95B.05  assimilates the teachings from 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s 
biography that one can overcome 
the problems with wits, courage and conscience.
04.95B.06  tells the variety of clothings based 
on geographical and cultural parameters. 
 1. Maharashtra before Shivaji  1 
 2. Work of the Saints  3
 3. Maratha Sardars - 
  The Famous House of the Bhonsales  8
 4. Shivaji’s Childhood  12
 5. Shivaji’s Education  17
 6. The Oath of Swaraj  21
 7. Swaraj : First Conquest  25
 8. Defeat of Internal Enemies  29
 9. Pratapgad makes History.  32
 10. Baji Prabhu and the Memorable Battle of Ghodkhind  37
 11. The Discomfiture of Shaistakhan  42
 12. The Siege of Purandar and the 
  Treaty with the Moghul Emperor  45
 13. Shivaji gives the slip to the Emperor.  50
 14. The Fort is captured but the Lion is dead.  53
 15. A  Memorable Ceremony  57
 16. Campaign in the South  60
 17. Management of Forts and the Navy  65
 18. Management of the Welfare State of Swaraj  70Sr.No.  Name of the Lesson  Page No.CONTENTS
 “Shivaji did not belong to Maharashtra 
alone; he belonged to the whole Indian nation.
 Shivaji was not an ambitious ruler 
anxious to establish a kingdom for himself 
but a patriot inspired by a vision and political ideas derived from the teachings of the ancient philosophers. He studied the merits and faults of the systems of administration in kingdoms existing at the time and determined his own policies and administration in the light of that knowledge.
 A  devout Hindu, he was tolerant of 
other religions and established a number of endowments for maintaining sacred places belonging to them. As a general he was undoubtedly one of the greatest in Indian history ; he saw the need for and raised a navy to guard his coastline and to fight against the British and the Dutch. Pratapgad Fort built in 1656 stands today as a monument to his military genius.
 Shri Shivaji is a symbol of many 
virtues, more especially of love of country.”
- JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
 A Painting of Shivaji Maharaj by Mir Mohammad, a Painter of Shivaji’s Time 
(From the original in Paris Museum)
Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production
and Curriculum Research, Pune.Education Department’s Sanction Number :
Pra Shi Sa  / 2014  -15 / 2102  / Manjuri  / D - 505 / 755 Dated 4.2.2014
SHIVACHHATRAPATI
(ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES - PART TWO)
STANDARD FOUR

Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research, Pune - 411 004.
The Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research 
reserves all the rights relating to the book. No part of this  book  should be reproduced without the  written permission of  the Director, Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production and Curriculum Research, Pune.
Preface
 The ‘Primary Education Curriculum - 2012’ was prepared 
in the State of Maharashtra following the ‘Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009’ and the ‘National Curriculum Framework 2005’.  The syllabus is being 
implemented serially from the academic year 2013-2014.  
 The syllabus includes the subjects General Science, Civics and Geography under ‘Environmental Studies-Part 1’ from Standard III to Standard V. It specifies that  the subject History will be independent under ‘Environmental Studies-Part 2’.
 The Textbook Bureau has prepared this textbook for Std IV 
according to the syllabus approved by the State Government. 
 Our approach while designing this textbook was that the 
entire teaching-learning process should be child-centred, the method of self-study should receive more emphasis, at the end of Primary Education the students should have attained the desired competencies and the process of education in general should become enjoyable and interesting.
 This textbook attempts to present the inspiring history 
of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj in an easy and effective manner. The life and work of Shivaji Maharaj is a source of inspiration for the entire State of Maharashtra and the country. Many inspiring episodes related to his personality have been included here. This book was rewritten after properly screening the complaints and suggestions received from various social organizations, institutes and individuals. Also, some suitable changes were made where necessary. 
 The book scrutinized by many educationists and subject 
experts from all parts of the State to make it as flawless and standard as possible. The comments and suggestions received have been duly considered while finalizing the book. The History Subject Committee, the artist, and the photographer have taken great pains to prepare this book.The Bureau is thankful to all of them.
 We hope that this textbook will receive a warm welcome 
from students, parents and teachers.©
PuneDate : February 19, 2014(C.R.Borkar)
Director
Maharashtra State Bureau of
Textbook Production and
Curriculum Research, Pune.
History Subject Committee :
Dr A. H. Salunkhe, ChairmanDr Somnath Rode, MemberDr Neeraj Salunkhe, MemberShri Bapusaheb Shinde, MemberShri Mogal Jadhav, Member-Secretary
Co-ordination : 
Shri. Mogal JadhavSpecial Officer, History and Civics
Illustrations : Prof. Dilip Kadam, 
Shri. Devdatta Balkawade, Shri. Sanjay Shelar
Photographs : Shri. Pravin Bhonsale
Cartographers :  Shri Ravikiran Jadhav
Dr Neeraj Salunkhe
Translation : Prof. Pratap P. Shirole
Scrutiny : Dr Ganesh RautCo-ordination : Dhanavanti HardikarAcademic Secretary for LanguagesSantosh Pawar Assistant Special Officer, English
Production :
Sachchitanand Aphale, Chief Production OfficerPrabhakar Parab, Production OfficerShashank Kanikdale, Production Assistant
Typesetting :
DTP Section, Textbook Bureau, Pune
Paper : 70 GSM Creamwove
Print Order No. :Printer :
Publisher :
Shri. Vivek Uttam Gosavi, ControllerMaharashtra State Textbook Bureau,Sayani Road, Prabhadevi, Mumbai - 25.First Edition : 2014Revised Edition :September 2016Reprint : July 2018
N/PB/2019-20/1,00,000
M/S. IMPRINTS, THANE


The learner may be provided opportunities in 
pairs / groups / individually and encouraged to :
• ask questions and discuss with family members/elders as to why some family members stay together and others are away, interact with relatives, friends etc. and understand who stay at far off places, about the houses/ transport and life in their place of residence.
• frame the questions on the basis of experience and reflect it without any fear or hesitation.
• discuss with the parents/guardians/grandparents/elders in the neighbourhood and 
compare the life style of past and present and 
daily used items e.g. (clothes, vessels, nature of 
work, skills, games); inclusion of children with 
special skills, needs.
• role play based on events in Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj's life.
• find how to overcome problems with the help of courage, hard work and presence of mind through group discussion.
• develop an awareness regarding the conservation of environment, water literacy, equality and justice with the help of examples in the life of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. 
• participate in different cultural/national/environmental festivals/occasions organised in/at home/school/community, for example, morning or special assembly/ exhibition/ Diwali, Onam, Earth Day, Eid etc. Do creative  writing in events of celebrations, dance, drama, theatre, etc. (for example, diya/rangoli /kite 
making/ models of buildings/bridges etc. and sharing experiences through stories, poems, slogans, reports the events narration/creative writing (poem/story) or any other creative tasks.
• explore/read books, newspaper clippings, audio, stories / poems / pictures / videos/tactile /raised material/web resources/ library and any other resources besides textbooks.
• understanding the difference between the traditional and modern costumes.
• collecting information reagarding languages dialects, festivals and celebrations in the State.Suggested Pedagogical Processes Learning OutcomesEnglish Environmental Studies - Part 2 - Standard IV
The learner-
04.95B.01  identifies relationship with and 
among family members in extended 
family.
04.95B.02  voices opinion on issues observed/ 
experienced in family/ school/ 
neighbourhood for example, on stereotypes, discriminatory practices, child rights.
04.95B.03  participates actively and 
undertakes initiatives of care, share empathy, leadership by working together in groups for example, in different indoor/ outdoor/ local/ contemporary activities and games, carries out projects/ role play for taking care of a plant/s, feed birds/ animals, things/ elderly/ handicap.
04.95B.04  tells the thril ling incidences of 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s life/ personality.
04.95B.05  assimilates the teachings from 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s 
biography that one can overcome 
the problems with wits, courage and conscience.
04.95B.06  tells the variety of clothings based 
on geographical and cultural parameters. 
 1. Maharashtra before Shivaji  1 
 2. Work of the Saints  3
 3. Maratha Sardars - 
  The Famous House of the Bhonsales  8
 4. Shivaji’s Childhood  12
 5. Shivaji’s Education  17
 6. The Oath of Swaraj  21
 7. Swaraj : First Conquest  25
 8. Defeat of Internal Enemies  29
 9. Pratapgad makes History.  32
 10. Baji Prabhu and the Memorable Battle of Ghodkhind  37
 11. The Discomfiture of Shaistakhan  42
 12. The Siege of Purandar and the 
  Treaty with the Moghul Emperor  45
 13. Shivaji gives the slip to the Emperor.  50
 14. The Fort is captured but the Lion is dead.  53
 15. A  Memorable Ceremony  57
 16. Campaign in the South  60
 17. Management of Forts and the Navy  65
 18. Management of the Welfare State of Swaraj  70Sr.No.  Name of the Lesson  Page No.CONTENTS
 “Shivaji did not belong to Maharashtra 
alone; he belonged to the whole Indian nation.
 Shivaji was not an ambitious ruler 
anxious to establish a kingdom for himself 
but a patriot inspired by a vision and political ideas derived from the teachings of the ancient philosophers. He studied the merits and faults of the systems of administration in kingdoms existing at the time and determined his own policies and administration in the light of that knowledge.
 A  devout Hindu, he was tolerant of 
other religions and established a number of endowments for maintaining sacred places belonging to them. As a general he was undoubtedly one of the greatest in Indian history ; he saw the need for and raised a navy to guard his coastline and to fight against the British and the Dutch. Pratapgad Fort built in 1656 stands today as a monument to his military genius.
 Shri Shivaji is a symbol of many 
virtues, more especially of love of country.”
- JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
 A Painting of Shivaji Maharaj by Mir Mohammad, a Painter of Shivaji’s Time 
(From the original in Paris Museum)
1
1. Maharashtra before Shivaji
Shivaji Maharaj was a great man. 
We celebrate his birth anniversary with 
great pomp and reverence. It is a happy day for you children. You sing songs and ‘powadas’ in his honour. You garland his picture and say ‘Shivaji Maharaj Ki Jai’. 
Who was this Shivaji Maharaj  ? What was 
the great work he did that we celebrate his birthday every year ?
The time in which Shivaji Maharaj 
lived was that of the medieval period. In those days, monarchy or the rule of kings prevailed everywhere. Many of the kings pursued their own pleasures and enjoyments instead of the welfare of their subjects. But even in those days, there were some kings who looked after the welfare of their subjects. The Moghul Emperor Akbar in the North and Emperor Krishnadevraya of Vijaynagar in the South are famous in history for their benevolent rule. Likewise, Shivaji Maharaj also commands great respect even today.
Shivaji Maharaj established Swaraj 
in Maharashtra. Swaraj means self-government, our own rule. For about four hundred years before Shivaji Maharaj, Maharashtra was not free. A large portion of it was under the rule of the Nizamshah of Ahmadnagar and the Adilshah of Bijapur. These two Sultans had divided Maharashtra among themselves. They were not liberal in their outlook. They oppressed the people over whom they ruled. They were also sworn enemies of each other. They constantly fought against each other with the result that the people suffered and were harassed. The people could not get enough to eat, nor could they celebrate their festivals or worship their gods openly and freely. They were not sure of safety even in their own homes. There was injustice everywhere. In Maharashtra, there were many Watandars like Deshmukhs and Deshpandes who owned Jagirs. They loved only their Jagirs and not their country. The constant fighting among them brought great misery to the people. There was misrule everywhere. People were tired of this oppression and were very unhappy.
Shivaji Maharaj saw all this. He 
undertook the noble task of establishing Swaraj in Maharashtra which would bring happiness to the people. He first brought to book the Watandars who fought among themselves. He then used them in his plan to establish Swaraj. He fought against the Powers that oppressed the people, and defeated them. He established ‘Hindavi Swaraj’ based on justice, fair play and equal treatment to people of all castes and religions. Shivaji Maharaj made no distinction between Hindus and Muslims. He honoured the saints of all religions. We draw inspiration from these noble deeds of Maharaj.
During a period of about three to four 
hundred years before Shivaji Maharaj, many saints were born in Maharashtra. Their work helped Shivaji Maharaj in his successful effort of establishing Swaraj. We shall see in the next chapter, what these saints did.
2
1.Fill in the blanks choosing the correct
option.
(a) The time in which Shivaji Maharaj lived
was that of the .......... period. 
 (ancient, medieval, modern)
(b) Shivaji Maharaj established Swaraj in 
.......... .
 (Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,  
Uttar Pradesh)
2.Match the pairs.
   ‘A’              ‘B’
(a) Emperor of (1) Nizamshah
      Vijaynagar 
(b) Sultan of (2) Adilshah
     Ahmadnagar  
(c) Sultan of Bijapur  (3) Krishnadevraya
(4) Emperor Akbar3.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) Name the kings who looked after the
welfare of their subjects.
(b) What noble task did Shivaji Maharaj 
undertake ?
(c) Who did Shivaji Maharaj fight against  ? 
4.Find the odd-man-out.
(a) Swaraj, slavery, freedom
(b) People, subjects, king
Activity
(a) Celebrate Shivajayanti in your class.  
(b) Present historical songs and ‘Powadas’ in 
the cultural programmes held in your school. EXERCISES

3 Shri Chakradhar Swami :  Shri 
Chakradhar Swami was originally a prince 
from Gujarat. He became an ascetic, and came over to Maharashtra. He moved all over Maharashtra preaching equality. He did not believe in any discrimination based on gender or caste. So, several men and women became his followers. The sect he established is known as ‘Mahanubhav’ sect. Memorable incidents from his life have been compiled in a book titled ‘Leelacharitra’.
 Sant Namdeo : Sant Namdeo was a 
great devotee of Vitthal. He lived in the village Narasi. He composed numerous songs in praise of god, performed  The tradition of Sants that began in 
Maharashtra with Shri Chakradhar, Sant Namdeo, Sant Dnyaneshwar, Sant Chokha Mela was continued by Sants coming from various strata of society. In this group of Sants are included Sant Goroba, Sant Sawata, Sant Narhari, Sant Eknath, Sant Shaikh Mahammed, Sant Tukaram, Sant Niloba etc. Similarly,  Sant Janabai, Sant Soyarabai, Sant  Nirmalabai, Sant Muktabai, Sant Kanhopatra and Sant Bahinabai Shiurkar are also included.
 They taught people various virtues 
like compassion, non-violence, charity, service, equality and brotherhood. No one is inferior, no one is superior. All are equal. Such was the sentiment that was created by Sants in the minds of people. Similarly, Samarth Ramdas also rendered his work in Maharashtra. 
2. Work of the Saints
Shri Chakradhar Swami
 Sant Namdeo
4‘Keertans’ (songs and stories based on a 
religious theme) everywhere and brought about general awakening among the people. He moved all over Maharashtra to spread Bhagwat dharma and taught the people deep devotion to God. He instilled in them the desire to protect their religion. Sant Namdeo later travelled all over India spreading the message of 
humanity. He travelled to the Punjab and 
spread the message of equality among 
the people there. He composed songs in 
Hindi. Even today, some of his verses are 
included in ‘Guru Granth Sahib’, the holy 
book of the Sikhs. His songs are still sung all over Maharashtra with great love and devotion.
Sant Dnyaneshwar :  Sant 
Dnyaneshwar’s family belonged to Apegaon. Nivruttinath and Sopandeo were his brothers. Muktabai was his sister. Bigoted men of the time used to look down upon these children because they were the offspring of a ‘Sanyasi’. It happened like this. Their father took ‘Sanyas’ and retired from worldly life. As a Sanyasi, he 
left home. But later on, obeying 
the order of his guru, he returned 
home and started living with his 
wife. Their four children were born afterwards. The narrow-minded religious leaders did not think it right that a ‘Sanyasi’ should have children. People persecuted these children and banished them from their community.
Once Dnyaneshwar went 
round the town begging for alms. But no one would give him any alms. He had to listen to abusive language instead. Young 
Dnyaneshwar was deeply  pained by this 
incident. He entered his hut and locked the door from inside to grieve over his lot. Muktabai came and knocked at the door. She said, “Open the door, Dnyaneshwar. How can we remain drowned in our own sorrow ? Who will then look to the 
welfare of the world  ?” These words of his 
sister gave new hope to Dnyaneshwar. He 
forgot his personal sorrow and started his 
work. Everywhere, the poor and backward 
people were being oppressed in the name 
of the religion. Dnyaneshwar went among 
the people and taught them to have faith 
in God. ‘Give equal treatment to all. Help those in trouble and allay their misery.’ This was the gist of his advice to the people. Dnyaneshwar’s words are heard 
in every nook and corner of Maharashtra for the last seven hundred years.
In those days, all religious teaching 
was confined to Sanskrit books. The language of ordinary people in everyday use was Marathi. Dnyaneshwar wrote his outstanding book ‘Dnyaneshwari’ in Marathi. He thus opened wide for his 
Sant Dnyaneshwar
5
Sant Eknathpeople the doors of knowledge, where he 
preached the ideal of brotherhood among all men. At a very early age, at Alandi near Pune, Dnyaneshwar took ‘Samadhi’, 
that is, put himself in a trance from which he never came out. Even today, on the eleventh day of Ashadh and Kartik, lakhs of pilgrims go to Alandi-Pandhari with devotion. even to the dumb animals. He exhorted the people to love all living beings and practised what he preached.
One day he was going to the river 
Godavari for a bath. It was noon and very hot. The sand bed along the riverside was very hot too. He heard the crying of a poor  
child sitting on the hot sand. Eknath looked around and saw the child. He rushed to 
him and looked around for the child’s parents. He picked up the child in his arms, wiped his tears and reached him home.
In this way, by his personal 
example, Eknath impressed the message of love and equality on the minds of the people. 
Sant Tukaram :
 Two   great 
saints, Tukaram and Ramdas 
lived in Shivaji’s time. Tukaram 
came from Dehu, near Pune. He owned a farm and also a 
grocery shop. His forefathers used to 
lend money to the needy people. But 
Sant TukaramSant Eknath :  Sant Eknath carried on 
the work started by Sant Namdeo and Sant 
Dnyaneshwar. He lived in Paithan. He preached that the way to reach God was through devotion 
- 
‘Bhaktimarg’. He wrote numerous religious songs 
- ‘Abhangs’, ‘Owees’ 
and ‘Bharuds’. His advice to the people was not to accept any distinction of high and low. He made friends with the poor and the downtrodden and taught them devotion to God. His love extended 
6Samarth Ramdas
Tukaram drowned in the river Indrayani, 
all the record of loan papers he had, thus 
giving relief to many. He would go to the neighbouring hill and sing songs in praise of God Vitthal. On the eleventh day, ‘ekadashi’ of the month of Ashadh and Kartik, he would go to Pandharpur. He wrote devotional songs 
- ‘Abhangs’ 
and performed ‘Keertans’. Thousands 
flocked to listen to him. Shivaji Maharaj 
also attended his Keertans. Sant Tukaram 
preached to the people about the virtues of 
pity, forgiveness and peace of mind. He 
also gave them the message of equality. 
‘He alone is a saint, and God dwells with him who calls the weak and the downtrodden as his own’. He impressed this truth on the minds of the people. He made them think. People accepted him as a great religious leader and showered their praise on him. Even today, all over Maharashtra, we hear people proclaiming ‘Gyanba - Tukaram’ the names of the two great saints. Sant Dnyaneshwar is called ‘Gyanba’ also. Even today, ‘Tukaram 
Gatha’ is read in every household. 
Samarth Ramdas : At the same time, 
the hills and valleys of Maharashtra were 
filled with the echoes of ‘Jai, Jai Raghuveer 
Samarth’ (Glory be to the great Rama) an invocation constantly on the lips of the great saint Ramdas. Ramdas was born at Jamb on the banks of the Godavari in Marathwada. His birthday falls on Ram-Navami, the day on which the great hero, Rama, was born. Narayan was his real name but he preferred to call himself Ramdas, the servant of Rama. Through his great book ‘Dasbodh’ he taught 
men the ways of good life. Through his 
‘Manache Shlok’ (stanzas addressed to the mind) he gave people lessons in good thoughts and good conduct. To popularise the worship of strength, he raised the temples of Hanuman, the god of strength. He exhorted people to be strong and told them of the power that resides in a united people. He taught them to organize themselves and fight against injustice. This gave courage to the people.
The work of the saints brought about 
a great awakening among the people. Religion once again became a thing to be respected and a spirit of self-reliance was born. People regained their lost confidence. This great awakening among the people brought about by the saints helped Shivaji in his fight for Swaraj.
lll
71.Fill in the blanks :
(a) Sant Namdeo was a great devotee
of .......... .
(b) At a very early age, at .......... near Pune, 
Dnyaneshwar took ‘Samadhi’.
(c) Sant Tukaram drowned in the river 
.........., all the record of loan papers he 
had. 
(d) To popularise the worship of strength, 
Samarth Ramdas raised the temples of .......... . 
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) What  discrimination  did  Shri 
Chakradhar    Swami    not    believe ?
EXERCISES
(b) What desire did Sant Namdeo instil 
among the people ?
(c) What advice was rendered by Sant 
Eknath ?
(d) What message was propagated by 
Samarth Ramdas ?
3.Give answers in three or four sentences.
(a) Why did Sant Dnyaneshwar lock
himself   in   his   hut ?
(b) What message did Sant Tukaram give  ?
Activity
Collect the pictures of Sants other than those included in this lesson and below the pictures, write their thoughts.

8
3. Maratha Sardars - The Famous House of the Bhonsales
Period of Unrest : As the saints 
preached devotion to God, the brave 
Maratha Sardars started a tradition of 
bravery.
This was a period of great unrest. 
The two Sultans, the Adilshah of Bijapur and the Nizamshah of Ahmadnagar 
were constantly at war with each other. 
They made use of the armies of Maratha 
Sardars in these wars.
The Brave Maratha Sardars : The 
Marathas were both brave and tough. They were also fearless and loyal to 
their masters. They were very proud of their achievements on the battlefield. The 
brave Maratha soldier with a spear in 
hand and a sword at the side would ride 
in his Sardar’s cavalry. All the Maratha 
Sardars had their own private armies. If such a Sardar went to the Sultan with his 
army, the Sultan gave him employment, 
made him a Sardar of his kingdom and 
sometimes conferred a Jagir upon him. 
The Sardar who received such a Jagir 
considered himself a Raja.
There were many famous Maratha 
Sardars at the Courts of Ahmadnagar and Bijapur. The more famous among 
them were the Jadhavs of Sindkhed, Nimbalkars of Phaltan, Ghorpades of 
Mudhol, Moreys of Javali, Bhonsales 
of Verul. The Sindkhed Jadhavs were 
descendants of the Yadavs of Devgiri. 
Jijabai, the mother of Shivaji Maharaj was the daughter of Lakhujirao Jadhav 
of Sindkhed.Tradition of Valour : All these 
Sardars were brave but many of them 
were sworn enemies of one another. They 
never thought that they should unite and do something for their own people. So all their valour and bravery served the interests of others. Even so, they kept alive the warlike spirit, especially among the young. Many famous soldiers were born in their families who kept alive the tradition of valour.  Among the famous families, the Bhonsales of Verul showed great bravery and enterprise.
The Temple of Ghrushneshwar :  It 
was about four hundred years ago. The temple of Ghrushneshwar near the Verul caves was falling to pieces. The walls had developed cracks. The priest also had deserted the temple. Thus the temple which was built in honour of a great god was totally neglected. All the devotees who came there mourned over the sorry state of the temple, but no one thought of repairing it.
A great devotee of Shiva visited the 
temple regularly. He would put flowers and ‘bel’ on the ‘lingam’ and express his innermost thoughts to the God. He carried out extensive repairs to the temple and restored it to its original condition. 
He also made arrangements for the 
proper maintenance of the temple. Now 
there were lights both inside and outside 
the temple and the lost grandeur of Ghrushneshwar was restored. Who was 
this devotee who did all this  ? He was 
Maloji Raje Bhonsale.
9Shahaji  Raje

10The Bhonsales of Verul :  Maloji 
Raje Bhonsale, the Patil of Verul, was a 
great devotee of Shiva. Babaji Raje had two sons. Maloji Raje was the elder, and Vithoji Raje the younger. Babaji Raje Bhonsale had the rights of a Patil in the Verul village.
Maloji Raje and Vithoji Raje were 
both brave and enterprising. They had in their service many armed Maratha troops. It was a period of great unrest. The Moghul Emperor from Delhi had attacked the Kingdom of Nizamshah. Daulatabad was then the capital of Nizamshah. Malik 
Amber was his Vazir or Chief Minister. 
Malik Amber was able and wise. The 
two capable and brave brothers from Verul soon caught his attention. On his recommendation, the Shah conferred on Maloji Raje the Jagir of Pune and Supe Parganas.
So the Bhonsales became rich 
and powerful. Maloji Raje’s wife was 
Umabai. She came from the House of 
the Nimbalkars of Phaltan. They had two sons, Shahaji and Sharifji. Maloji Raje was killed in a battle at Indapur. At that time Shahaji was only five years old. Then Vithoji Raje looked after the children and the Jagir. Later, he asked in marriage for Shahaji, the daughter of Lakhujirao Jadhav. Jijabai, the daughter of Lakhujirao, was well favoured by the gods. Lakhujirao accepted Vithoji Raje’s proposal. Lakhujirao was a brave and valiant Sardar in the court of Nizamshah. He kept a large army of his own. He commanded great respect and honour at the court of Nizamshah. He celebrated the wedding of Shahaji Raje and Jijabai with great pomp. Jijabai became the Fortune of the Bhonsale family.
Shahaji Raje :  Nizamshah 
transferred to Shahaji Raje the Jagir he had conferred on Maloji Raje. Shahaji Raje was a brave and capable man held in great respect at the court of Nizamshah. The Moghul Emperor decided to conquer the Kingdom of Nizamshah. For this, he made an alliance with the Adilshah of Bijapur. Malik Amber and Shahaji Raje fought bravely to save Nizamshahi. They defeated both the armies. This battle took place at Bhatawadi near Ahmadnagar. 
Sharifji was killed in the battle. Shahaji 
Raje displayed great valour. He was 
praised everywhere as a brave General. His reputation in the court was so enhanced that even Malik Amber began to feel jealous of him. This gradually led to  antagonism between them. As a result, Shahaji Raje left Nizamshahi and joined the court of Adilshah at Bijapur. Adilshah honoured him with the title of ‘Sar Lashkar’ (Chief of Army). Later, there were many developments 
in Nizamshahi. The Vazir Malik Amber 
died. His scheming son Fattekhan became 
the Vazir of Nizamshahi. During his 
period, the Nizamshahi began to decline. At about the same time, there was a threat of Moghul aggression. So, Nizamshah’s mother appealed to Shahaji Raje to return to Nizamshahi and save it. Therefore, Shahaji Raje left Adilshahi and returned to Nizamshahi.
lll
111.Fill in the blanks choosing the correct
option.
(a) Among the famous families, the .......... 
of Verul showed great bravery and 
enterprise.
(Moreys, Ghorpades, Bhonsales)
(b) Babaji Raje Bhonsale had two sons,
Maloji and ......... . 
(Vithoji, Shahaji, Sharifji)
(c) .......... was a capable Vazir of
Nizamshah.
(Malik Amber, Fattekhan, Sharifji)
2.Write the relation between :
(a) Maloji Raje - Vithoji Raje .......................
(b) Shahaji Raje - Lakhujirao Jadhav ........
(c) Shahaji Raje - Sharifji ...........................
(d) Babaji Raje - Vithoji Raje .......................
3.Match the pairs.
         ‘A’            ‘B’
(a) Sindkhed (1) Nimbalkar
(b) Phaltan (2) Ghorpade
(c) Javali (3) Bhonsale
(d) Mudhol (4) Morey
(5) Jadhav4.Give the answer in one sentence.
(a)  Who restored the temple of
Ghrushneshwar to its original condition ?
(b)Which Jagir was bestowed upon Maloji
Raje by  Nizamshah ?
(c) Who fought bravely to save
Nizamshahi ?
(d)With what title did the Adilshah honour
Shahaji Raje ?
(e)Why did Shahaji Raje leave Adilshahi
and return to Nizamshahi ?
Activity
Locate places like Ahmadnagar, Phaltan, Verul, 
Supe, Pune in the map of Maharashtra.
Note :  The word ‘Maratha’ here does not mean the ‘specific caste of an individual’.  
It means ‘Marathi Speaking People’ or ‘Maharashtrians’.
EXERCISES

12
The Birthplace of Shivaji Maharaj at Fort Shivneri
Birth of Shivaji :  Those were very 
unsettled days. Shahjahan from the 
North had despatched a big army to conquer the Deccan. Pune, the principal town of Shahaji Raje’s Jagir was burned to the ground by Adilshah of Bijapur. Shahaji Raje was in real trouble. He found himself between the devil and the deep sea, and was constantly on the run.
Jijabai was pregnant and the great 
question which worried Shahaji Raje was  4. Shivaji’s Childhood
some place where she could remain in safety and peace. Then he remembered the Shivneri fort and decided to send Jijabai there. Shivneri was a strong fort near Junnar in Pune district. It had steep cliffs on four sides, strong fortifications and massive doors. This strong fort was then in charge of Vijayraj, a relative of the Bhonsales. He agreed to give protection to Jijabai. So Shahaji Raje left her there and marched against the Moghuls.
13
Veermata Jijabai tells Shivaji stories of brave men.And then the golden day dawned. 
On the auspicious day of Phalgun Vadya 
Tritiya, in the year 1551 of the Shaka era, 
that is, on 19 February 1630, to the sound of pipes and drums playing in the ‘Nagar Khana’, Jijabai gave birth to a son. All the residents of the fort were overjoyed. On the twelfth day, with appropriate ceremony, the child was named ‘Shivaji’ 
as the child was born on Fort Shivneri.
Shivaji’s Childhood : Shivaji passed 
the first six years of his life in highly 
unsettled conditions. Even so, Jijabai did not neglect his education. Every evening 
she would light the household lamps and 
then call Shivaji to her. She would shower 
all her affection on him and tell him stories of Rama and Krishna, of Bhim and Abhimanyu. On other occasions she would recite to him the devotional  
songs of Namdeo, Dnyaneshwar or Eknath. Shivaji liked to listen to the exploits of brave men. Shivaji felt that on growing up, he should also display valour like them. Jijabai used to tell him stories of many pious persons and saints. That instilled in him, a respect and honour for all saints and great men.
Children from poor families came to 
play with Shivaji. Sometimes he visited them in their huts and shared their simple meal of onion and bhakri with great relish. They invented interesting games to pass the time. The children of the Mavlas were like birds in the forest. They would 
imitate the sound of the cuckoo or parrot 
or tiger to perfection. Their pastime was 
building small forts of earth and making earthern elephants and horses. They played hide and seek, or played with a ball or top. Shivaji joined them in all these games and became popular with them.
14Shahaji Raje towards the Moghuls   : 
Shahaji Raje returned to Nizamshahi all 
right, but he did not get any peace of mind there. Nizamshah himself was a fickle-minded person who readily believed all gossip. Hence, many conspiracies and petty rivalries infested the court. This led to the killing of Lakhujirao Jadhav openly in the court at the instigation of Nizamshah himself. Shahaji Raje could not withstand this. Infuriated, he left Nizamshahi and joined the Moghuls. Shahjahan, the Moghul Emperor, made him a Sardar at his court.
 In the meantime, secretly joining 
hands with the Moghuls, Fattekhan killed Nizamshah. There was complete anarchy in the state. It became evident that Fattekhan was treacherously planning to enable the Moghuls to swallow Nizamshahi. In return, the Moghuls rewarded him with the territory under the control of Shahaji Raje. Shahaji Raje was enraged and so he left the services of the Moghuls. He decided to teach them a lesson using all his might.
Founding of a New Nizamshahi : 
In order to forestall the Moghul Emperor and Vazir Fattekhan, Shahaji Raje found out a child heir from the Nizam’s family and on the fort of Pemgiri near Junnar, declared him as the new Nizamshah. Thus, he established an altogether new kingdom which included the territory between the rivers Godavari and Nira. Shahaji Raje fought vigorously to protect this new state. Initially, Adilshah was with him in these efforts. But later, 
Shivaji with his Friends
15the Moghul Emperor Shahjahan himself 
marched South upon Shahaji Raje and threatened Adilshah. Adilshah then signed a treaty of friendship with him against Shahaji Raje. 
Shahaji Raje now began to fight the 
joint forces of the Moghuls and Adilshah using guerrilla tactics. But he could not sustain the war all by himself. In 1636, unwillingly, he signed a treaty of peace with Moghuls. He could not create his own kingdom as the times were not favourable for him. But his daring spirit kindled a confidence among the Marathi 
people. This proved useful for Shivaji in 
establishing Swaraj a few years later.
Jijabai and Shivaji in Karnatak :  
After the downfall of the Nizamshahi 
established by Shahaji Raje, its territory 
was divided by the Moghuls and 
Adilshah amongst themselves. Shahaji Raje’s Jagir of Pune and Supe lay within Adilshah’s share. He gave it to Shahaji Raje on his behalf. Now Shahaji Raje joined the Adilshahi services. Adilshah assigned to him, the task of conquering the territories in distant Karnatak, far away from Pune. Some time after the departure of Shahaji Raje to Karnatak, Jijabai and Shivaji also joined him there.
 Shivaji’s childhood in Maharashtra 
had been very hectic. He and Jijabai had to rush continuously from one fort to another. At that time, young Shivaji used to hear the stories of the brave deeds of his father. Jijabai and Shivaji 
got some peace when they arrived in 
Karnatak. Shahaji Raje defeated many 
kings in Karnatak. Adilshah awarded him with the Jagir of Bangalore. Shahaji Raje then made the city of Bangalore his headquarters. He lived there with all the trappings of a king and began to summon the court.
1. Fill in the blanks choosing the correct 
option.
 (a)  Shivaji was born on the .......... fort.
  (Purandar, Shivneri, Panhala)
 (b)  Adilshah assigned the task of conquering 
the territories in .......... to Shahaji Raje.
  (Karnatak, Khandesh, Konkan)
2. Write the answer in one sentence.
 (a)  What did Shivaji feel due to Jijabai’s 
teaching ? (b)  What games did Shivaji and the children 
of the Mavlas play ?
 (c)  Why did Shahaji Raje leave             
Nizamshahi ?
3. Write the answers in two or three 
sentences.
 (a)  Whose stories did Jijabai tell Shivaji ?
 (b)  Why did Shahaji Raje declare the child 
heir from the Nizamshah’s family as the 
new Nizamshah  ?
EXERCISES
16
Fort Shivneri - Maha DarwajaActivity
(a) Make a trip to Fort Shivneri and collect 
information about the birthplace of 
Shivaji Maharaj.(b) Make a list of traditi onal sports and write 
a note on any one of them in 10 lines.

17
Beginning of Shivaji’s Education   : 
Shahaji Raje himself was a scholar of 
Sanskrit. In the Bangalore court, he had under his patronage, artists and scholars of various languages. He appointed intelligent teachers for Shivaji. Shivaji’s education began when he became seven years old. Soon, Shivaji became skilled in the art of reading and writing. He began to read the stories from ‘Ramayan’, ‘Mahabharat’ and ‘Bhagwat’, on his own. To teach him warfare, Shahaji Raje had appointed some teachers. They began to teach Shivaji to ride a horse, to wrestle, to use swords and Dandpatta. Thus, at the age of twelve, Shivaji became acquainted with different branches of learning and arts. 5. Shivaji’s Education
Shivaji’s Education under the Supervision of Shahaji RajeSoon, Adilshah sent Shahaji Raje 
on an expedition to conquer the States of the Nayakas (local chiefs) in Karnatak. Before setting out upon the expedition, Shahaji Raje sent Shivaji and Jijabai to Pune. With them, he sent elephants, horses, an infantry, a treasury, a flag, as also trusted ministers, brave generals and renowned teachers.
Rejuvenation of Pune : Jijabai 
and Shivaji returned to Pune. Shivaji remembered his childhood days which he had spent on Shivneri. He could see the lofty peaks of the Sahyadri again and he became very happy. Pune at that time was not such a big city. It was totally devastated by Shahaji Raje’s enemies. 
18Properties were damaged. Houses were 
demolished. Temples had collapsed. The frightened people had fled from their villages. Fields had become barren. Thick forests had grown. Wolves roamed in the countryside. Pune, thus, was totally in shambles and ruins.
 When the people living around 
came to know that Jijabai has returned to Pune with Shivaji, they took heart. Jijabai called all of them and reassured them that they would be safe in Pune. People started settling in Pune, cultivating their lands. Jijabai had the dilapidated temples repaired. In the temples, worship began morning and evening. The town was again throbbing with people. Thus, Pune was totally transformed.
 The Achievements of Dadaji 
Konddev : When Jijabai and Shivaji were in Karnatak, Dadaji Konddev looked after the Pune Jagir. He was the ‘Subhedar’ of Kondana also. He was very faithful. He was strict, efficient and honest in his work. He was also just, and a strict disciplinarian. He served with devotion. At about this time, a big wada or residence was built in Pune by the orders of Shahaji Raje. It came to be known as ‘Lal Mahal’. To encourage the peasants to till their lands, Dadaji gave them concessions in the land tax for a few years. He offered prizes for destroying the wolves which infested the countryside and harassed the peasants. Many wolves were killed. He raised peasant patrols to protect life and property from gangs of thieves who roamed the countryside. He fixed land revenue according to the quality of the soil. He thus made the people happy. In the fields of agricultural reform and revenue collection, the work done by Dadaji Konddev and the Nizamshahi Vazir Malik Amber is considered to be very important.
 Shivaji’s Education :  When Shivaji 
returned to Pune, his education continued 
under the supervision of Jijabai. While returning from Bangalore, Jijabai and Shivaji were accompanied by eminent teachers sent by Shahaji Raje. They taught him many sciences, branches of learning and languages. 
 Shivaji acquired the knowledge of 
excellent administration, war tactics, fort architecture, selection of horses and elephants, ways of escaping from difficult enemy territories and many other things. Shivaji’s progress in education pleased Jijabai very much.
What Veermata Jijabai Taught 
Shivaji : Jijabai was no ordinary woman. She was the daughter of the mighty Sardar Lakhujirao Jadhav and the wife of the brave and valiant Shahaji Raje. She had inherited the knowledge of politics and warfare from her infancy. In her was witnessed the confluence of the martial traditions of the famous Houses of the Jadhavs and Bhonsales. She was a freedom loving person with a great sense of pride. She had learnt through bitter experience that however much a Maratha Sardar displayed valour, it was not appreciated in the courts of the Sultans. She had valiantly faced the shock of her father’s murder in the open court at the instigation of Nizamshah. She had 
19Veermata Jijabai
resolved that her son Shivaji would never 
be engaged in the services of others. He 
would establish the rule of his own people 
- Swaraj. She was bringing up Shivaji with that ideal.
The people living in the Maval region 
were called Mavlas. They were loyal, 
hardworking and quick-footed. No one could surpass them in hardiness. But they 
were harassed by the Sultans’ rule. The 
armies of the Sultans used to plunder their villages, forcing the people to abandon their places. Nobody cared for them. Shivaji yearned to do something for these poor, miserable people.
On returning home, Shivaji would 
talk about this to his mother. Jijabai would 
say, “Shivba, Shri Ramchandra is the  
ancestor of the Bhonsales. Rama killed 
Ravan and made his people happy. The ancestor of the Jadhavs is Shri Krishna. 
He killed Kans and brought relief to his 
people. You are a descendant of both 
Shri Rama and Shri Krishna. You can 
also destroy the wicked and make your 
subjects happy.” 
These words of Jijabai were a source 
of inspiration to young Shivaji. He would 
remember the brave deeds of heroes of the 
past like Rama, Krishna, Bhim, Arjun. 
He thought of them all the time, whether 
asleep or awake. He felt that he, too, must 
fight against injustice as they did, and like them, destroy the wicked and bring happiness to his subjects. He thought that he should become courageous and brave 
like these heroes of old.The New Regime of Shivaji :  In Pune 
Jagir, the new regime of Shivaji began 
under the guidance of Jijabai. Shahaji Raje had already made the preparations for this. When Shahaji Raje sent Shivaji from Bangalore to Pune, he sent some very powerful and prestigious people with him. They were Samraj Neelkanth Peshwe, Balkrishna Hanamante Muzumdar, Mankoji Dahatonde Sarnobat, Raghunath Ballal Sabnis, Sonopant Dabir. These were all able men fit to administer an independent kingdom. Shahaji Raje had specially deputed them to Pune to help 
20Shivaji govern his Jagir efficiently. With 
their help, Shivaji began to administer his Jagir, to attend the people’s grievances. Those who inflicted injustice upon the ryot were punished. In a way, Shahaji Raje’s Jagir was undergoing a transformation. The Mavlas got a glimpse of the future 
‘Swaraj’. It was, as it were, the dawn of 
Swaraj.
1.Fill in the blanks choosing the correct
option.
(a) Shahaji Raje was a scholar of .......... .
 (Sanskrit, Kannad, Tamil)
(b) People living in the Maval region were 
called .......... .
(peasants, soldiers, Mavlas)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) Who appointed teachers for Shivaji and
where ?
(b) What did the teachers begin to teach 
Shivaji ? (c) Why did Dadaji Konddev give 
concession in land tax to peasants ?
3.Give the answer in two or three sentences.
(a) How was Pune rejuvenated ?
(b) What knowledge did Shivaji acquire ?
(c) What had Jijabai resolved ?
Activity
(a) Write and enact a dialogue between 
Shivaji and Jijabai.
(b) Read the biography of V eermata Jijabai.
EXERCISESShivaji’s Marriage :  In those days, 
people married at a very early age. So, Jijamata said, “We should now get Shivba 
married.” Then a search for a suitable bride for Shivba began.  Soon she found the girl she wanted. Her name was Saibai. Saibai came from the Nimbalkar family of Phaltan. The marriage was celebrated with great splendour.

21
The Temple at Raireshwar :  To 
the south-west of Pune, there is a beauty 
spot called Raireshwar famous for its temple. In the year 1645, an extraordinary event took place there. Shivaji and a few Mavlas from the neighbouring valley had gathered there. Why had they come to this lovely spot hidden in deep forest ? What did they discuss and what favour did they ask of Lord Shiva ?
The Fiery Eloquence of Young 
Shivaji : Shivaji was still quite young 
but his mind was already busy planning big things. He opened his mind to his playmates and said, “My dear friends, today I am going to talk to you about something which is in my mind for a long time. My father Shahaji Raje is a Sardar at the court of Bijapur. It is he who has given me the charge of this Jagir. Everything is going on well and peacefully. But, friends, I am not happy. Must we always remain satisfied as bondmen of the Sultan ? Must we always eat out of other people’s hand ? We are surrounded on all sides by foreign kingdoms which are constantly at war. Our people get killed for nothing during these wars and family after family gets uprooted. Our country suffers destruction. And what do we get out of all this ? Nothing but slavery. How long shall we continue to tolerate this ? How long shall we lay down our lives for others ? Shall we allow this to continue just for the sake of a small Watan ? What have you to say about all this ?”6. The Oath of Swaraj
Shivaji was speaking with great 
emotion and his face was red with anger. In the middle of his speech he stopped and looked at his companions. The young Mavlas gathered there in the inner sanctum of Raireshwar were greatly thrilled by Shivaji’s speech. They had seen a new vision. One of them said, “Our young prince, tell us clearly whatever is in your mind. We are prepared, we are anxious to do your bidding.” “ Yes Raje,” they all said with one voice, “We are with you, we shall do whatever you say at the 
cost of our lives if need be  !”
The Oath of Swaraj : Shivaji 
got fresh inspiration from their words. Looking at each one of them he said, “Friends, our path is clear. We shall all strive to attain our ideal, work for it till it is achieved. All should be ready even to sacrifice their lives for this ideal which is ‘Hindavi Swaraj’. We will have our own Raj, yours and mine and everybody’s. We refuse to live as slaves any more. Let us take this oath with Lord Raireshwar as 
witness  ; we give ourselves completely 
to the great task of establishing our own Raj, Swaraj.”
The temple echoed the words of 
Shivaji. “God thinks that this Kingdom should take shape as Hindavi Swaraj. We shall see that God’s wish is fulfilled.”
So the Mavlas left the temple, 
committed to the oath of freedom, of Swaraj. The mind of Shivaji was filled 
22
The Oath of Swaraj
23with great joy. As soon as he reached Pune 
he went straight to Lal Mahal to see his 
mother. He described to her all that took 
place at Raireshwar. Overjoyed, Jijabai 
thought with satisfaction that Shivaji 
would accomplish what was always in her mind.
Preparations in the Maval 
Valley :  Shivaji soon got busy with 
his new activities. Along with his comrades he started intensive training 
in swordsmanship, riding, exploring 
the secret paths in the hills and getting familiar with the general topography of 
the land, its valleys and ghats and possible 
communication routes. He won over the 
Mavlas who became his most devoted 
followers, willing to lay down their lives for him at any time. Shivaji’s enthusiasm 
increased a thousandfold. Shivaji made a 
detailed survey of all the forts and military 
establishments in the area. In this, his 
followers were of great help to him. In the course of time, he came to know the  
smallest detail of every establishment; 
secret pathways, underground routes, 
ammunition dumps and cellars.
Friends in Maval :  All over the 
twelve Mavals there were Deshmukhs, guarding their individual ‘Watans’ (gifted 
land in lieu of service) to which they were 
more attached than anything else. There 
were constant quarrels between them leading to useless waste of money and 
manpower. Shivaji saw this waste and 
decided to put an end to it. He would visit 
the Deshmukhs in the area, talk to them, 
persuade them to desist from their folly and raise before them a very attractive picture The Royal Seal
of the Swaraj of his dreams. He thus won many of them over to his side. He used 
force against those who were adamant. In 
this way he stopped the mutual warfare. 
Everybody was pleased with this happy 
result and all started singing the praises of Shivaji. Zunjarrao Maral, Haibatrao 
Shilamkar, Baji Pasalkar, Vithoji Shitole, 
Jedhe, Paygude, Bandal were some of 
the Deshmukhs in the Maval valley 
who began to look upon Shivaji as their leader. The dream of Swaraj was fast 
approaching the day of fulfilment.
Shivaji’s Royal Seal : The Jagir was 
already being administered in the name of 
Shivaji. Shahaji Raje had cast a special 
royal seal for Shivaji. It read : 
à{VnÀM§ÐboIod d{Y©îUw{d©ídd§{XVm Ÿ&&
emhgyZmo… {edñ`¡fm _wÐm ^Ðm` amOVo Ÿ&&
‘This seal will grow in splendour like 
the new moon. This seal of Shivaji, the son of Shahaji, receiving homage from 
the whole world denotes the welfare of 
the people.’ This Royal seal in a way,  
foretold the foundation of Swaraj.
 In those days most of the royal seals 
were carved in Persian. Shivaji’s was in 
24Sanskrit. This was a significant change. 
There could be no Swaraj without your own language and your own religion. But at the same time, there should not be a hatred for other religions. The seal was a 
1.Fill in the blanks :
(a) To the south-west of Pune, the ........... 
temple was a beautiful spot.
(b) All over Maval there were ........... 
guarding their individual Watans.
(c) Shahaji Raje had cast a special ........... 
for Shivaji.
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) What words of Shivaji echoed in the
temple ?
(b) What did Jijabai think with joy and 
satisfaction ?
EXERCISESguarantee to all the Mavlas that Shivaji’s Government was for the welfare of the people. They were quick to grasp this point.
(c) What did Shivaji come to know in his 
detailed survey ?
(d) What did Shivaji decide to put an end to ?
3. Write the answers in two or three sentences.
(a) What was the ideal of Shivaji ?
(b) What did Shivaji start doing with his
comrades ?
Activity
Design and display a picture of the Oath of 
Swaraj.

25
It is no doubt true that Shivaji and his 
comrades took the oath of Swaraj in the 
temple of Raireshwar. But it was a  very 
difficult task. In those days, Maharashtra 
was governed by four different powers, 
the Moghul Emperor of Delhi, Sultan 
Adilshah of Bijapur, the Portuguese of Goa and the Siddi of Janjira. They were 
powerful opponents, firm in their authority. 
No one would dare utter a word against 
them. Under these difficult conditions 
Shivaji had taken the oath of Swaraj. There was no comparison between the 
vast forces of the enemy and a handful 
of Shivaji’s Mavlas. But Shivaji’s mind 
was made up and his firm resolve was his 
greatest source of strength.
Torana Fort : Shivaji controlled the 
Jagir of Pune, Supe, Chakan and Indapur. 7. Swaraj : First Conquest
Fort Torana (Zunjar Machi)All the forts in the Jagir were, however, in the charge of officers from the court 
of Bijapur. He who controlled the forts 
also controlled the surrounding territory 
and, therefore, all talk of Swaraj without 
the control of the forts was meaningless. A hill fort gave strategic support to the 
ruler and Shivaji decided to capture one 
at a suitable time. For this purpose he had 
selected the fort of Torana. It stands to the 
south-west of Pune in the Kanad Valley. It was a renowned fort, well-suited for 
defence. There were two strong ‘Machis’ 
on the way to the fort. A ‘Machi’ is a 
fortification of a natural plateau formed 
on the slope of a hill. One of these ‘Machis’ was the ‘Zunjar Machi’ and the other, the 
‘Budhla Machi’. ‘Zunjar Machi’, like 
its name, could offer powerful defence 
26against the enemy. The only access to 
the fort was across the ‘Zunjar Machi’. 
It is a very difficult passage with high 
hills on one side and deep valleys on the 
other. A careless person may easily lose 
his balance and end his life in the deep valley. Torana was considered one of the 
strong forts of Maharashtra. In the fort 
there is a temple of the goddess Toranjai. 
That is why the fort is called Torana. 
Strangely enough, this powerful fort was neglected by Adilshah. There were 
neither enough troops for its defence nor 
enough ammunition. Shivaji knew this 
and this was exactly what he wanted. He 
decided to capture the fort and thus lay the foundation of Hindavi Swaraj.
The drums of Swaraj begin to 
sound  : With a few select bands of Mavlas, 
Shivaji descended into the Kanad Valley. 
Swift-footed like the deer and lion-
hearted in courage, they raced to the top 
and captured the strategic positions in the 
fort. Tanaji Malusare hoisted the Maratha flag at the main entrance. Yesaji Kank,  
a trustworthy and loyal companion of Shivaji, posted his guards at important 
points; the fort was captured almost 
without any resistance and the sky was filled with shouts of “Shivaji Maharaj ki 
Jai”. The first battle drums and pipes of 
Hindavi Swaraj had sounded and their 
echo reverberated throughout the valley. 
Shivaji named this fort ‘Prachandgad.’
Blessings of Goddess Bhavani : 
Fort Torana then came under Shivaji’s administration. He made a very careful 
survey of it and appointed officers such as a Maratha Killedar, a Brahmin Sabnis 
and a Prabhu Karkhanis. The garrison included Mavlas, Kolis, Ramoshis, 
Mahars and such brave men from many 
other castes and communities. In Swaraj 
all castes and communities were to be 
treated alike and no distinctions made on the basis of caste. As repairs to the fort 
started, a surprise awaited the people. 
They discovered four metal pots filled to 
the brim with mohurs. The workers were 
overjoyed. They said that this was a gift to Shivaji from the Goddess Bhavani who 
had blessed his efforts. All the money 
discovered was brought to Shivaji. No 
one thought of taking anything from it 
for himself. After all it was the wealth of Swaraj. Shivaji felt greatly elated at 
this unexpected gift which would enable 
him to pursue his ideal of Swaraj with 
added vigour. He felt that he was working 
under the benevolent eye of the goddess 
Bhavani. 
Shivaji utilised part of the treasure 
found in the fort to purchase arms and ammunition. The rest he decided to use 
for another project which was already in 
his mind. About fifteen kilometres to the 
east of Torana is the hill of Murumbdeo. Shivaji had his eye on it for a long 
time. This hill was steep and difficult of 
access and, therefore, of great strategic 
importance. Adilshah had actually started 
constructing a fort on this hill but had left it unfinished. This hill also was not well-
guarded and Shivaji decided to capture it.
The First Capital of Swaraj : One 
day Shivaji climbed up the hill with a select 
27
Fort Rajgad - Pali Darwaja
band of his followers and took possession 
of the partially completed fort. The money 
found on Torana was used to complete 
the fortifications of Murumbdeo. Shivaji 
named this fort Rajgad. Stone masons, 
carpenters, blacksmiths, water carriers, other workers - all the people got busy. 
They built the Rajmahal, Bara Mahal and 
eighteen workshops. Rajgad became the 
first capital of Swaraj.
Shivaji’s Rapid Progress :  From 
then onwards, Shivaji moved swiftly and captured one fort after another in Maval. 
The whole country known as Bara Maval 
- the twelve Mavals - was overflowing 
with joy and excitement. The Patils and 
Deshmukhs from many villages came 
and swore allegiance to Shivaji. But 
Maval had its own share of black-legs 
who were ever ready to put a spoke in the fast moving wheel of Swaraj. Jealous 
of Shivaji’s success, they complained 
to the Adilshahi Collector at Shirval. The Collector despatched messengers 
to Bijapur and informed Adilshah of 
Shivaji’s rapid progress.
Shivaji the Shrewd Politician :  
Adilshah was most surprised to get the news. He asked Shahaji Raje for an 
explanation. Shahaji Raje got himself 
out of this difficult situation by telling the Sultan that Shivaji Raje had probably taken over the fort for better administration 
of the Jagir. Shivaji also sent this message 
to the Sultan. “I have taken possession of the fort for better administration of 
the countryside. We did this only in the 
interest of the Sultan. There was no evil design at the back of this action.”
The two forts of Kondana and 
Purandar too had strategic locations. Shivaji used his political skill and took 
control of both the forts. The next fort 
to come under his sway was Rohida. This was fast work indeed and there was 
nothing to stop Shivaji now.
281.Fill in the blanks :
(a) Shivaji controlled the Jagir of Pune,
Supe, Chakan and ........ .
(Indapur, Saswad, Welhe)
(b) Shivaji decided to capture the fort of 
........ and lay the foundation of Hindavi 
Swaraj.
(Sinhagad, Shivneri, Torana)
(c) ........ became the first capital of Swaraj.
(Rajgad, Raigad, Pratapgad)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) Which four different powers governed
Maharashtra in those days ?(b) What officers were appointed by Shivaji 
on the fort of Torana ?
(c) What message did Shivaji send to 
Adilshah ?
3.Give reasons.
(a) Shivaji selected the fort of Torana to
lay the foundation of Swaraj.
(b) The workers brought the pots of mohurs 
discovered on the fort of Torana to Shivaji.
Activity
Arrange a trip to the nearest fort with the help of 
your teachers.
EXERCISES

29
By Use of Force : The Mavlas of the 
twelve Mavals gathered round Shivaji, 
ready to do his bidding. They lived for 
Swaraj and were willing to die for it. 
They were simple Maratha folk. They loved Shivaji more than their life. But some people were jealous of Shivaji’s 
achievements. He had to bring such 
people to book.
Khandoji and Baji Ghorpade were 
two Sardars in the service of Adilshah. 
The Shah incited them against Shivaji. 
They created a lot of trouble in the Kondana district but Shivaji was more 
than a match for them. He defeated and 
drove them out.
Bajaji Naik Nimbalkar of Phaltan 
was Shivaji’s own brother-in-law. But Shivaji Maharaj had to fight many battles against him. However, later on, members of this family stood by Shivaji Maharaj.
Sambhaji Mohite of Supe, a near 
relative of Shivaji, also started plotting against Shivaji. Shivaji arrested him at Supe and banished him to Karnatak. With 
Shivaji, duty came first and relatives 
afterwards.
Chandrarao Morey of Javali : The 
greatness of Shivaji’s achievements was recognised and applauded everywhere. He 
captivated the heart of his people. Some 
people did not like this. They looked upon Shivaji as a mole in the eye. The Morey 8. Defeat of Internal Enemies
of Javali was one such person. Morey was the Jagirdar of Javali. This Jagir which extended from Raigad to Koyna Valley, 
along with the title ‘Chandrarao’, was 
conferred upon him by Adilshah. Javali was covered with such a thick forest that even during broad daylight, the sun’s rays 
hardly penetrated it. It was full of wild life. 
Tigers, wolves and bears roamed freely in the Javali forest. Morey’s Javali was thus like a tiger’s hideout. No one, therefore, crossed Morey’s path. Only Shivaji had 
the courage to do so.
Daulatrao Morey died in 1645. There 
was fight for the succession among his 
descendants. Shivaji backed Yeshwantrao Morey who, with Shivaji’s help, ascended the ‘gadi’ as ‘Chandrarao’. In return for Shivaji’s help, Yeshwantrao promised to 
help Shivaji in his struggle and also pay 
him an annual tribute. But he forgot all this once he succeeded to the ‘gadi’. He became impertinent and troublesome. He 
started attacking Shivaji’s territory and 
harassing the people. Shivaji realised that unless Morey was punished, he would remain a constant danger to Swaraj.
‘Rebel and you will die’ :  Shivaji  
first sent a stiff note to Yeshwantrao Morey, “You call yourself the Raja. But I am the Raja of this territory. This 
Kingdom is Lord Shiva’s gift to me. So do 
not call yourself the Raja.”
30In a very rude reply Yeshwantrao 
said, “You are a Raja of only yesterday. 
Who gave you this Kingdom ? If you 
come to Javali, you will be trapped. By 
the grace of God, I have received from Adilshah the title of ‘Raja’. He has also in his graciousness given me a throne and 
the panoply of a Raja. If you start any 
trouble here, you will be badly hurt.”
Shivaji replied, “Give up Javali and 
your pretensions to Kingship. Come before 
your master with folded hands and accept 
his service. You will refuse to do so at the risk of your life.”
The conquest of Javali was a 
difficult operation. It was covered 
with thick forest and protected by the 
impregnable Rairi fort. Morey also 
Fort Raigadhad numerous followers. Shivaji after making thorough preparations, attacked Javali. Yeshwantrao held out for about 
a month but suffered very heavy losses. 
He then escaped to Rairi along with his family. Shivaji conquered Javali and then marched on Rairi. He laid siege to Fort 
Rairi. Yeshwantrao fought desperately 
for three months but he had to give up.
Fort Raigad : The conquest of Javali 
was a very important landmark. This 
doubled the boundaries of Swaraj under 
Shivaji. Yeshwantrao’s army, too, joined the forces of Shivaji. The strong Rairi fort 
became a part of Swaraj. Shivaji was 
highly pleased to have this fort under his control. He changed its name to ‘Raigad’. 
Later on, he built a new fort on the Bhorpya 
hill nearby. It was named ‘Pratapgad’.
311.Find out the wrong pair.
(a) Phaltan  - Nimbalkar
(b) Javali  - Morey
(c) Supe -Jadhav
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a)What title was conferred by Adilshah
upon the Moreys of Javali ?
(b)Why was the conquest of Javali a very
important landmark ?3.Write the answers in two or three
sentences.
(a)Why did no one cross Morey’s path ?
(b) What note did Shivaji send to
Yeshwantrao Morey ?
Activity
1.Collect pictures of Raigad.
2.Prepare a model of Raigad with the help of
your friends, in your Diwali vacation.
EXERCISES

32
Adilshah Perturbed :  The Court of 
Adilshah at Bijapur was passing anxious 
days, due to the growing exploits of Shivaji. 
The Sultan summoned all his Sardars to 
court to take stock of the situation. All the Sardars including those known for their exploits and those comparatively 
unknown attended. Badi Saheba, the 
Dowager Queen, who personally looked after the Adilshahi administration from Bijapur was also present. The one question before the assembly was “How to bring 
Shivaji to book and break his revolt.” 
Badi Saheba asked a straight question 
to her Sardars, “Tell me, who is willing to 
march against Shivaji and put an end to 
his rebellion?”
The court became silent. Everybody 
sat quietly in his place and started looking 
at the next person, for who would dare 
accept the challenge of fighting Shivaji ? 
Just then a giant of a man came forward and bowed respectfully before the throne. His name was Afzalkhan.
The Khan accepts the Challenge   : 
The Khan accepted the challenge and picked up the betel leaf from the salver as 
a mark of acceptance. “Shivaji. Who is 
Shivaji ?” he said, “ I shall arrest him and bring him here or if that is not possible,     I shall bring his dead body.”
Afzalkhan was one of the mighty 
Sardars at the court of Bijapur. His  physical prowess and strength were 9. Pratapgad makes History.
unbelievable. He could bend a crowbar with his bare hands. He was a past master in achieving his end by any available 
means. This Afzalkhan had accepted the 
challenge of bringing Shivaji to court, dead or alive. The court was highly pleased. Everybody thought that it was 
the end of Shivaji and that he would be 
brought to Bijapur either alive or dead.
Afzalkhan left Bijapur in great pomp. 
He was accompanied by a huge army fully 
equipped for battle. He was previously 
the Subhedar of Wai for twelve years and knew the country well. He marched on Maharashtra full of pride and confident of success.
Swaraj in Danger :  At this time 
Shivaji was at Rajgad. He got the news of Afzalkhan’s movements. He immediately saw that his Swaraj was in great danger. 
But he did not lose courage. He knew that 
the Khan was full of stratagem and had a huge army with him. Shivaji’s kingdom was very small in comparison and so was his army. He could see that he could 
never hold his own in open battle against 
the Khan. His only hope was in some strategic move that would take the Khan by surprise. In consultation with Jijabai 
and with her blessings, Shivaji Maharaj 
shifted his headquarters from Rajgad to Pratapgad.
Afzalkhan’s Counter-move :  When 
the Khan learnt that Shivaji had moved to 
33
Fort PratapgadPratapgad, he became very angry. He was 
aware of the difficulties in conquering 
Pratapgad. It was surrounded by thick 
forest and high hills. There was no proper approach road to the fort and it was very 
difficult to move his artillery. Besides, the 
jungle was full of wild life.
The Khan initiated many moves 
in the hope of bringing Shivaji down to 
the plains. He attacked the holy cities of 
Pandharpur and Tuljapur. He harassed the people. He was hopeful that these 
tactics would bring Shivaji down to the 
plains. But Shivaji proved too clever for 
him. He refused to leave Pratapgad. Then 
the Khan changed his tactics. In a spirit of apparent friendliness he sent a message to 
Shivaji. “You are like a son to me. Come 
and see me. Return our forts and I shall see that Adilshah makes you a Sardar at 
his court.”Tit for Tat : Shivaji quickly saw 
through the Khan’s offer. He was taking 
no chances. He decided somehow to 
persuade the Khan to come up to the 
fort. In reply to the Khan’s message he said, “Khansaheb, I am guilty of having captured your forts. I must have your 
promise of pardon for this. Please come 
and meet me at the foothills of Pratapgad. I am really afraid of coming down to the plains to meet you.”
This reply of Shivaji pleased 
Afzalkhan. Passing his fingers through his beard he smiled and said, “This is good news. What can Shivaji do against the mighty Afzalkhan? He has no guts to 
fight me. I shall myself go to Pratapgad 
and put an end to his life when we meet.” So he agreed to Shivaji’s proposal.
The Meeting Place : The ‘Machi’ 
on Pratapgad was chosen as the meeting 
34
place. A date and time was fixed. It 
was agreed that each one would be 
accompanied by a servant and followed by ten bodyguards at a distance. A special 
road was constructed for the convenience 
of the Khan and a big shamiana put up for the meeting.
Every move of Shivaji was marked 
by great caution. He divided his army into small units. Each unit was told where to hide and when and how to act. He took 
every measure for safety and left nothing 
to chance. Many of his advisers tried to dissuade him from meeting the Khan. 
The Khan’s word could not be trusted. 
But Shivaji brushed aside this advice and decided to meet the Khan as arranged.
Before the Meeting :  On the day of the 
meeting, Shivaji visited Bhavani’s temple in the morning and took ‘darshan’. Soon after, he started putting on his ceremonial 
clothes. He wore his Surwar and coat 
of mail. Over the coat of mail, he wore a kurta and a flowing robe. On his head he placed the Jiretope (helmet) and tied a Mandil around it. He fitted Waghnakh 
onto the fingers of his left hand. Hidden 
inside the left sleeve was a Bichwa and he carried the Dandpatta in his hand. He was now ready to face the Khan.
All the Sardars were waiting outside. 
Shivaji turned to them and said, “Friends, each one of you must carry out the duties assigned to you. I am sure the goddess Bhavani will see that we succeed. But if things go wrong and I am killed, do not lose heart. Install Sambhaji on the ‘gadi’, follow the commands of Maasaheb. Fight for Swaraj and extend its boundaries. 
Make the subjects happy. I shall go now 
to meet the Khan.” He was accompanied by his Vakil Pantaji Gopinath and ten 
bodyguards including Jivaji Mahala, 
Sambhaji Kavji, Yesaji Kank, Krishnaji  Gaikwad, Siddi Ibrahim and others.
When Shivaji reached the shamiana 
he saw that the Khan had already arrived. He was busy planning his future moves. Standing by his side was an armed soldier, 
Bada Sayyad by name. He was highly 
skilled in the use of Dandpatta. Shivaji came to the entrance of the shamiana, but on seeing Bada Sayyad, he stopped and would not proceed further. The Khan 
asked Shivaji’s Vakil why Shivaji stood 
at the entrance instead of coming in.Coat of mailWaghnakh
BichwaJiretope
(Helmet)
Dandpatta (Patta)
35
Shivaji meets Afzalkhan.
The Vakil said, “He is afraid of Bada 
Sayyad. Please ask him to go away.” 
Bada Sayyad moved away and Shivaji 
stepped in. The Khan got up and said, 
“Come, Shivaji Raje, let us embrace each other as a mark of our friendship.”
The Struggle with the Khan  : 
Shivaji Maharaj cautiously took a step forward and the Khan took him in his 
embrace. Compared to the giant Khan, 
Shivaji was short. He reached only as far as the Khan’s chest. At the same moment, the Khan held Shivaji’s neck in his iron 
grip and stabbed him on the side with his 
dagger. It tore apart Shivaji’s robe but the coat of mail underneath saved him. Shivaji, knowing that the Khan was trying to kill him, quickly thrust the Waghnakh 
in the Khan’s stomach. Drawing out the 
Bichwa with his right hand, he drove it into the Khan’s stomach and tore apart his guts. The wounded Khan fell down. Khan’s Vakil, Krishnaji Bhaskar, came forward and attacked Shivaji with his sword. But Shivaji killed him with one 
stroke of the Patta. When Bada Sayyad 
heard the shouts and noise he rushed into the shamiana. As he was about to strike Shivaji, Jivaji Mahala came between 
them and killed Bada Sayyad with one 
stroke. ‘Because of Jiva, Shiva was saved’ became a common saying afterwards.Sambhaji Kavji displayed great bravery in this conflict.
The Rout of the Afzalkhan’s Army   : 
Thus with triumph Shivaji went up to the fort. The gun boomed and gave the 
signal. On the instant, Shivaji’s troops 
came out of their hiding and attacked the Khan’s army. The Khan’s army was 
36completely unprepared for the attack and 
was caught in a difficult terrain. They could not even run away to save their lives. The Maratha troops chased them in hot pursuit and destroyed the whole of the Khan’s powerful army. Fazalkhan, Afzalkhan’s son who escaped with great difficulty, reached Bijapur. His account of the disastrous campaign spread gloom over the whole of Bijapur.
Shivaji thus humbled the most 
powerful Sardar of the Bijapur Court. His fame spread everywhere. The songs of his exploits were heard in the hills and valleys of Sahyadri.
EXERCISES
1.Form a correct word from the given
letters.
(a)  r   t   P   a   p   a   g   d   a
(b)  j   a  i     i   S   v   h
(c)  n   h   l   z   A   a   f   k   a
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) What challenge did Afzalkhan accept ?
(b) What message did Afzalkhan
send Shivaji in a spirit of apparent 
friendliness ?
3.Give the answer in two or three sentences.
(a) Why did Shivaji have to use some
strategic move to fight Afzalkhan ?(b) What did Shivaji say to his Sardars 
before going to Afzalkhan ?
4.Give reasons.
(a) Afzalkhan became very angry when
he learnt that Shivaji had moved to Pratapgad.
(b) Gloom spread over the whole of 
Bijapur.
Activity
Collect a few Marathi proverbs or sayings that are related to historical events.

37
Shivaji Conquers Panhala - 
Adilshah Gets Angry : While Bijapur 
was still mourning the death of Afzalkhan 
and the complete rout of his army, Shivaji 
captured the Panhala fort from the Bijapur garrison. This threw Adilshah into a fit of wild rage. He could neither eat nor sleep. 
He despatched another Sardar, Siddi 
Jauhar, against Shivaji.  Siddi Jauhar had a huge army with him. Fazalkhan who wanted to avenge his father’s death, also accompanied him. 
The Siege of Panhalgad : Siddi  
Jauhar was brave but ruthless. He was a strict disciplinarian. He laid siege to Panhalgad and confined Shivaji within the 
fort. The rainy season was approaching 
and Shivaji thought that once the rains came, Siddi Jauhar would lift the siege. But Siddi Jauhar did nothing of the kind. On the contrary, with the arrival of the 
monsoon, he further tightened the siege. 
Supplies in the fort were running out. Shivaji was in a fix. Since he could not force Siddi Jauhar to lift the siege by 
an open battle, he decided to deceive 
Siddi Jauhar by a clever ruse. He sent a message to Siddi Jauhar to the effect that 
he would shortly surrender the fort. Siddi 
was happy.
Siddi’s troops were already tired of 
the long siege. They were very pleased to hear that Shivaji agreed to surrender. They relaxed the watch and indulged in food, drink and music.
Shivaji Escapes from the Siege :  
A plan was hit upon to escape from the siege. Two palanquins were kept ready. One was meant for Shivaji in which 
he would proceed using a difficult 
route. The other would  be occupied by another person disguised as Shivaji. This palanquin was to leave by the ‘Raj-dindi’. This other palanquin would 
be easily spotted by the enemy forces, 
and it would be captured by them. While the enemy celebrated the capture of 
Shivaji, the real Shivaji would escape 
by the difficult route. This was the plan. For this a brave youth undertook this 
task. He resembled Shivaji in looks. 
His name was Shiva Kashid. He was a hairdresser in Shivaji’s service. He was courageous and shrewd.
As planned, the palanquin carrying 
Shiva Kashid came out of Raj-dindi. It was a dark night and it was raining 
heavily. Still, some enemy soldiers 
were keeping watch. They captured the palanquin. They thought that they had caught Shivaji himself and took the 
palanquin to Siddi’s camp. Jubilations 
began in the camp. In the meanwhile, 
Shivaji escaped from the fort by the 
difficult route. He was accompanied by Baji Prabhu Deshpande and some select 10. Baji Prabhu and the Memorable Battle of Ghodkhind
38soldiers. The Bandal Deshmukh army 
accompanied them. After some time, the plot of Shiva Kashid was exposed. The 
furious Siddi killed him then and there. 
Shiva Kashid sacrificed his own life in the cause of Shivaji and Swaraj. Thus, he became immortal.
When the Siddi learnt that Shivaji 
had given him the slip, he was livid with rage. Immediately, he despatched his Sardar Siddi Masaud, accompanied by 
a big army, in hot pursuit of Shivaji. At 
daybreak, the pursuing horsemen caught up with Shivaji at the Pandharpani stream. Shivaji was now in real trouble. With the greatest difficulty he and his men crossed 
the Ghodkhind.
Baji Prabhu, the Brave : The angry 
troops of Siddi were fast galloping 
towards the Ghodkhind pass. Shivaji saw 
that it was impossible to reach Vishalgad 
before the enemy overtook them. He said to Baji Prabhu, “Baji, this is a very critical situation. The road ahead is steep and the enemy is right on our heels. It is 
now impossible to reach Vishalgad. So 
let us turn back and face the enemy.” Baji Prabhu understood the great agitation going on in Shivaji’s mind. The enemy 
was fast approaching the pass. The life 
of Shivaji and, therefore, Swaraj, was in danger. He said, “Maharaj, you must proceed to Vishalgad. Take a handful of soldiers with you. I shall defend this pass 
and will not let the enemy cross it. I shall 
lay down my life in defence of this pass if need be. If I die, there will be many other Bajis to take my place. But no one 
can replace you. Our Swaraj needs you. The enemy will attack in large numbers. 
We cannot hold out against them with 
our limited force. Please do not wait. Go ahead. We shall stop the enemy at the entrance to the pass. We shall not 
let him advance till we know that you 
have reached Vishalgad safely.” Baji Prabhu’s brave words and his sense of loyalty brought tears to Shivaji’s eyes. He was most unwilling to sacrifice this 
gem of a man for his personal safety. But 
he had no time to think of these things. 
He wanted to achieve his ideal of Swaraj. 
He fondly embraced Baji and said, “We 
shall move ahead towards Vishalgad. 
As soon as we gain the fort, guns will be 
fired. That will be the signal of our safe 
arrival. As soon as you hear the gun-fire, 
abandon the pass and follow us to the 
fort.”
Baji’s Defence of the Ghodkhind 
Pass : So Shivaji left for Vishalgad 
leaving Baji Prabhu to defend the pass. 
Baji made a low bow to the receding 
figure of Shivaji and then prepared himself for battle. He took a sword in his 
hand and stood at the entrance of the pass. 
He divided his company of soldiers into 
small groups and posted them at suitable points. The Mavlas took their positions 
and collected huge boulders and stones to 
be used as weapons. The Mavlas across 
the pass were now a strong barrier in 
the path of the enemy. By this time the 
enemy had reached the mouth of the pass 
and one could hear their war cries. Baji 
39
Shivaji and Baji Prabhu Deshpande in Ghodkhind
40addressed his troops and said, “My brave 
soldiers and comrades, be prepared. You may die fighting but do not desert your 
post. Do not allow the enemy to conquer 
the pass, no matter what price has to be paid.” So Baji Prabhu and his Mavlas stood at the mouth of the pass, firm and 
fearless, awaiting the enemy. The pass 
was difficult to cross, there being only a narrow and a zigzag passage across it. 
At the other end, Shivaji was speeding 
towards Vishalgad. The fort was still some distance away and it would take 
Shivaji at least two hours to reach it. If 
Baji Prabhu could hold out for those two hours, Shivaji would be safe.
The Battle of Ghodkhind : By now 
the enemy was at the mouth of the pass 
where a fierce battle was in progress. The 
Mavlas who were adept at the use of the sling harassed the enemy with showers of stones and boulders from the hill-top and killed many of them. The first 
batch of the attacking troops withdrew in 
confusion. Another batch took their place. 
Baji Prabhu urged his troops into the 
attack. The Maratha war cry “Har Har 
Mahadeo” echoed through the hills and 
the brave Mavlas cut down the enemy 
troops in the fierce and desperate attack. Through the din of battle they heard 
their captain shouting encouragement to  
them : “Bravo, my lads, go ahead, attack and destroy the enemy”. The second batch of the enemy troops was also defeated.
Shivaji was by now, almost at the 
foot of Vishalgad. Vishalgad was also besieged by the enemy. Shivaji fought through the ranks of the besieging troops 
and was on the last lap of his ride to safety.
Baji the Brave :  In the meantime, 
the battle at the pass continued unabated. Enraged at the defeat of his first two attacks, Siddi Masaud organized and despatched a third batch of troops against 
Baji Prabhu and his brave men. They 
surrounded Baji Prabhu who fought with great courage. Though wounded and attacked from all sides, with his 
body covered with blood, Baji would not 
withdraw from the pass but continued the fight. At the same time, he urged his Mavlas to attack the enemy. Disheartened by the fearful attack, the enemy again 
withdrew. But Baji was fatally wounded. 
He was hanging on to life just to hear the sound of gun-fire from Vishalgad.
Ghodkhind becomes Pavan Khind : 
And then the sound of gun-fire was heard from Vishalgad. “Maharaj has reached Vishalgad. I have done my duty. Now I can die in peace.” So saying, Baji breathed his last on this historic battlefield. When 
Shivaji heard this news on Vishalgad, he 
was greatly grieved. He exclaimed, “Baji Prabhu Deshpande laid down his life on 
the battlefield in the cause of Swaraj. The 
Bandals gave a great battle.”
It was because of brave patriots like 
Baji Prabhu that Swaraj was won. Their blood made the Ghodkhind a place holy in Swaraj. Ghodkhind became immortal in history as ‘Pavan Khind’. We pay our 
repeated homage to the brave Baji Prabhu 
and his brave men.
411.Fill in the blanks :
(a)Siddi Jauhar laid a siege to ........... .
(b) Baji Prabhu’s sense of ........... brought 
tears to Shivaji’s eyes.
(c)Ghodkhind became immortal in history
as ........... .
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a)What message was sent to Siddhi Jauhar
by Shivaji, in order to escape from the
siege ?
(b)Why did Siddhi Jauhar become livid
with rage ?
(c)What did Shivaji say to Baji Prabhu,
while leaving for Vishalgad fort ?
3.Write the answers in two or three
sentences.
(a)Which plan was hit upon for Shivaji’s
escape from the siege ?(b)What preparation did Baji Prabhu make
to halt the enemy in the Ghodkhind pass  ?
4.Give reasons.
(a)Adilshah was thrown into a fit of wild
rage.
(b)Shiva Kashid in service of Shivaji
Maharaj became immortal.
(c)Pavan Khind became immortal in
History.
5.Write the name of the person :
(a)Brave and yet was cruel .............
(b) Gave most gallant fight at the
‘Ghodkhind’ pass ...................
(c)Escaped from the siege ............
Activity
Obtain more information about the dedicated 
people in the service of Shivaji Maharaj with 
the guidance of your teacher.
EXERCISES

42
Shaistakhan’s Campaign : In spite of 
repeated efforts in which he left no stone 
unturned, Adilshah of Bijapur could not 
force Shivaji to surrender. Every Sardar 
of Bijapur who was sent against Shivaji was defeated. Adilshah at last gave up the fight, made peace with Shivaji and gave 
recognition to his independent Kingdom. 
Shivaji thus had peace for some time on his southern border.
In the meanwhile, constant  
Moghul attacks from the north had practically ruined Maharashtra. Shivaji, therefore, turned his attention northwards 
and carried out raids in the territory 
of the Moghul Emperor, Aurangzeb. This enraged Aurangzeb and he sent 
Shaistakhan, his uncle, to deal with Shivaji 
and teach him a lesson. Shaistakhan with a huge army of 75,000 men and hundreds of elephants, camels and pieces of cannon marched on Pune. On the 
way he captured the towns of Shirval, 
Shivapur, Saswad and finally laid siege to the fort of Purandar. Nothing could stop his advance. But once the Maratha army surrounded him in a mountain pass. 
The Maratha troops moved very fast on 
their swift Bhimthadi ponies. They also 
travelled very light. They could traverse 
the hills and valleys in the shortest possible 
time on army rations consisting of onions and bajra bread. This type of warfare, perfected by the Marathas, was unknown 
to Shaistakhan. Tired of the continuous 11. The Discomfiture of Shaistakhan
harassment by the Maratha troops, he at 
last raised the siege of Purandar.
Firangoji Narsala : Shaistakhan 
then continued his march on Pune. First 
he captured the fort of Chakan. Firangoji 
Narsala fought to defend the fort with 
great bravery and skill against the 
army of Shaistakhan. For two months he kept Shaistakhan at bay, but he was 
helpless against the guns of Shaistakhan. 
Shaistakhan was much impressed with 
the way Firangoji defended the fort and 
offered him service with the Moghul Emperor. Firangoji however refused this 
tempting offer.
Shaistakhan in Lal Mahal : 
Shaistakhan came to Pune and made 
Lal Mahal, Shivaji’s residence, his 
headquarters. One year passed, then 
another year. Shaistakhan would not leave Pune. On the contrary, his troops would 
raid Shivaji’s territory, destroy crops and 
take away the cattle. In this way he started 
devastating the surrounding countryside.
A Bold Plan : At last Shivaji decided 
to teach Shaistakhan a lesson. In a way it was good that Shaistakhan was staying 
in Lal Mahal. Shivaji knew the place 
inside out, with all its entrances and exits, 
its secret passages, doors and windows. 
Besides, Shivaji’s spies were keeping 
him well informed about the disposition of the Khan’s troops. Shivaji, therefore, 
decided to enter Lal Mahal one night and 
kill Shaistakhan. This was indeed a very 
43
Shivaji attacks Shaistakhan.
bold plan. Lal Mahal was so well guarded 
that even an ant would find it difficult to 
get through. 75,000 troops were camping 
outside the palace. No armed Maratha 
was allowed to enter the town. But 
Shivaji had made up his mind and there was none who could turn him away from 
his resolve.
Shivaji fixed the date to carry out the 
plan. On the night of 5th April, 1663, a 
marriage procession was passing  along 
the streets of Pune. There was music, and 
fireworks accompanied the procession. Hundreds of people dressed in fine clothes were in the procession. Some 
were in Palanquins, others in ‘Menas’, 
while many more were on foot. Shivaji with his band of trusted followers joined 
the procession to give the impression that 
they were a part of it. After some time 
the procession proceeded on its way, but 
Shivaji and his men moved away quietly 
in the direction of Lal Mahal. Shaistakhan 
was fast asleep at   this hour.
Shaistakhan Learns a Lesson : 
Shivaji made a hole in the wall and entered Lal Mahal. He had no trouble in finding 
his way about, because it was after all, 
44his own house. The Khan’s bodyguards 
were half asleep. Shivaji’s followers tied them up. Shivaji went deeper inside. Suddenly, someone rushed at him with a sword. Shivaji killed him. He thought it was Shaistakhan, but it was his son. There was a commotion. People woke up. 
Shivaji went straight to the Khan’s 
chambers and took out his sword. Terrified, the Khan started shouting ‘the Devil, the Devil’ and tried to escape through the window. Shivaji struck him with the sword which cut off three fingers of the Khan.  The Khan could have lost his life, but he escaped with the loss of three fingers only. The Khan jumped out of the window and made for safety. To deceive the Khan’s troops, Shivaji and his men raised the cry, “Shivaji has attacked. Run, catch him,” and started to run themselves. The Khan’s troops also started running in all directions. In the confusion that followed, Shivaji and his men made their escape and reached Sinhagad. The Khan’s troops spent the whole night looking in vain for Shivaji and his troops. 
This incident took the fight out of 
Shaistakhan. He was afraid that if he lost only his fingers in the first attack, Shivaji might cut his head off in the second. Aurangzeb was furious when he heard of this episode. Shaistakhan lost the Emperor’s favour and was transferred to Bengal. 
This was the first serious blow to the 
Moghul Power. Shivaji had successfully bearded the lion in his own den. Gunfire announced the victory and a wave of joy went all over Maharashtra.
1.Fill in the blanks :
(a) Shaistakhan laid siege to the fort of
........... .
(Purandar, Panhala, Shivneri)
(b) In Pune, Shaistakhan made ............ his 
headquarters.
 (Shaniwar Wada, Lal Mahal, Parvati)
(c) Aurangzeb transferred Shaistakhan to 
............... .
(Assam, Karnatak, Bengal)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) Which towns did Shaistakhan capture
on the way to Pune ?
(b) Why did Shaistakhan at last raise the 
siege of Purandar ?
(c) What was Shaistakhan afraid that might 
happen ?3.Give reasons.
(a) Emperor Aurangzeb was enraged and
sent Shaistakhan to deal with Shivaji.
(b) Shaistakhan tried to escape through the 
window.
4.Write  the  incidents  or events 
chronologically :
(a) Shivaji and his men departed towards 
Sinhagad fort.
 (b) Shaistakhan made Lal Mahal his 
headquarters.
(c) Shaistakhan captured the fort of Chakan.
(d) Shivaji taught Shaistakhan a lesson.
Activity
Arrange a trip to visit Lal Mahal.
EXERCISES

45
Raid on Surat : After this triumph, 
Shivaji did not sit idle. Aurangzeb’s 
troops were laying waste the whole of 
Maharashtra. To bring the Emperor to his 
senses, Shivaji carried out his daring raid 
on Surat. Surat was so far away from Pune that no one but Shivaji could have thought 
of this daring raid. Surat was then a great 
centre of trade in the Moghul empire and 
a very rich city. Shivaji carried out the 
raid successfully and brought home a booty worth lakhs of rupees. Shivaji did 
not forsake ethics in the raid on Surat. He 
spared the churches and mosques. He did 
not show disrespect to women.  
Fort Purandar12. The Siege of Purandar and 
the Treaty with the Moghul Emperor
The raid on Surat drove Aurangzeb 
into a furious rage. He now decided to put an end to the Maratha Kingdom. He 
ordered his great general, Mirza Raje 
Jaising, to humble Shivaji. To assist Mirza Raje in the campaign, he sent with him his trusted Sardar, Dilerkhan. The 
two landed in the Deccan with a huge 
army and unlimited funds. Swaraj was in real danger.
Immediately after his return from the 
expedition of Surat, in 1664 AD, Shivaji Maharaj heard a sad news. Shahaji Raje had suffered an accidental death while on 
46a hunt. Shivaji and Jijabai were greatly 
grieved. Holding his mother close to his bosom, Shivaji Maharaj consoled her. 
Siege of Purandar by the Moghul 
Army : Purandar was one of Shivaji’s 
big and strong forts. Dilerkhan knew that Shivaji could not be defeated as long 
as he was the master of Purandar. He, 
therefore, laid siege to this powerful fort. He had a huge army under his command. Murarbaji was in charge of the fort. He 
was a determined fighter who would 
not easily yield to threats. He was also supported by brave troops. With their help Murarbaji decided to defend the fort. 
Dilerkhan’s guns went into action. 
Fiery cannon balls began to drop on the fort. Murarbaji and his brave men held on. The first bastion on the ‘Machi’ collapsed under gun-fire. Dilerkhan’s troops 
captured the lower fort. The Marathas 
withdrew to the upper fort and continued to fight. Dilerkhan was watching the battle from his camp. 
Furious with rage, Murarbaji decided 
to attack the Moghul troops with a select contingent of five hundred men. He opened the gates of the upper fort. Shouting their war cry, “Har Har Mahadeo,” the Mavlas fell on the Moghul troops. After a fierce 
battle which lasted for a short time, the 
Marathas routed the huge Moghul army which fled towards Dilerkhan’s camp.
Murarbaji followed them in hot 
pursuit. With his troops he entered the camp of Dilerkhan and wrought havoc there. The enemy troops were in flight and the Marathas in pursuit. Cries and 
shouts filled the whole camp. In great 
hurry Dilerkhan mounted his elephant 
and looked ahead. There was Murarbaji hacking the soldiers to pieces. His sword 
moved like lightning, cut throats, broke 
heads and pierced the hearts of the enemy. No one could stop him or hold him in 
check. Dilerkhan watched in admiration 
his great deeds of bravery.
Murarbaji’s Incomparable Valour   : 
Seeing Dilerkhan, Murarbaji asked his 
troops to attack in full force and himself 
advanced towards Dilerkhan. Whoever tried to obstruct him was cut to pieces. 
The Moghul troops at last surrounded 
Murarbaji on all sides. Just then Dilerkhan 
shouted, “Wait ; Hold back your swords   !” 
The Moghul troops halted and moved back a little. Then Dilerkhan addressed 
Murarbaji, “Until now I have not seen a 
swordsman like you. You come over to our side. I promise you complete safety. 
The Emperor will make you a Sardar, and 
reward you with a Jagir”. His eyes red with anger, Murarbaji said in return, “We 
are the loyal servants of Shivaji Maharaj. 
Who wants to buy safety from you
 ? Why 
should we come over to your side  ? And 
who wants your Emperor’s Jagir  ?” He 
then moved forward in the direction of Dilerkhan and again started attacking his 
soldiers. Dilerkhan who was seated in the 
houdah on the elephants back, released 
an arrow which pierced Murarbaji’s neck. 
Murarbaji fell to the ground. His followers lifted his dead body and took it back to 
47
The Battle between Murarbaji Deshpande and Dilerkhan
the upper fort. ‘What if one Murarbaji is 
fallen ! We, too, are brave like him. We will fight with courage.’ Saying so, they 
began to fight again without losing heart.
Shivaji heard the news with great 
sorrow. He knew that he could hold each 
one of his forts against the Moghul army for at least more than a year. But he was 
unwilling to do so at the cost of his men 
who would die in the attempt.
Treaty of Purandar : What could be 
done
 ? He was not strong enough to fight 
the powerful Moghuls. All his political skill was also of no avail. There was only 
one thing he could do. He decided on a temporary withdrawal from the fight. He 
would enter into a treaty with the Moghul Emperor. He went and saw Jaising. This was a very sensible and statesmanlike thing to do. He said to Jaising, “Mirza Raje, you are a Rajput. You can understand our suffering. The Emperor’s campaigns have laid the country waste and people are in great misery. I have undertaken this task of establishing Swaraj so that people may be happy. You should join me in this uphill task. If you agree to lead us, myself and my Mavlas will be your trusted followers.” Jaising was a shrewd diplomat. He persuaded Shivaji to sign 
48
Shivaji Maharaj meets Mirza Raje Jaising.
a treaty of peace with the Emperor. 
Shivaji signed the treaty and according 
to its terms, twenty-three forts and a 
territory with a revenue of four lakh Hons  
(a gold coin) were to be handed over to the Emperor. The treaty of Purandar was signed in 1665.
After the treaty was signed, Jaising 
suggested to Shivaji that he should go to Agra and see the Emperor. He also guaranteed Shivaji’s safe return. Shivaji thought over the suggestion. He knew that the Emperor could not be trusted. He had 
proved treacherous to his own brothers. 
But, in the end, Shivaji decided to take the risk and face the situation as cautiously as he could. He informed Jaising that 
he was willing to go to Agra to meet the 
Emperor.
lll
491.Fill in the blanks :
(a) ........... was a great centre of trade in the 
Moghul empire.
(Pune, Surat, Delhi)
(b) ........... was in charge of the fort of 
Purandar.
(Baji Prabhu, Tanaji, Murarbaji)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) Why did Shivaji carry out a raid on
Surat ?
(b) Why did Dilerkhan lay siege to the 
Purandar fort ?
(c) Why did Shivaji enter into a treaty with 
the Moghul Emperor ?
(d) According to the treaty of Purandar, 
what territory was to be handed over to 
the Moghuls ?
EXERCISES
3.Write the answer in two or three sentences.
(a) What did Dilerkhan say to Murarbaji on
seeing his valour ?
(b) What did Murarbaji say in return ?
4.Complete these names from the lesson
with the help of the given first letters.
(a)  Au  ........................
(b)  Pu  ........................
(c)  Mu  ........................
(d)  Ja  ........................
(e)  Di  ........................
Activity
Arrange a trip to visit a fort nearby. Obtain 
some information about it from your teachers.

50
13. Shivaji gives the slip to the Emperor.
Putting his trust in Jaising, Shivaji 
left for Agra to visit the Emperor. Before 
leaving for Agra, Shivaji handed over the 
administration of his Swaraj to his mother 
Jijabai and took her blessings. With him 
were his son Sambhaji Raje, some chosen 
Sardars, and a few trusted people. He also carried with him a large treasure. In due 
course he reached Agra.
Shivaji Shows his Spirit at the 
Emperor’s Court : On a prearranged 
day Shivaji Maharaj attended the 
Emperor’s Darbar. Young Sambhaji Raje 
Shivaji Maharaj in the Emperor’s Courtaccompanied him. It was Aurangzeb’s 
fiftieth birthday. After finishing court in Diwan-i-Khas, the Emperor entered the hall where matters of state were discussed.
In front of him stood his chief Sardars 
in serial ranks according to their status. Jaswantsing Rathod whom the Marathas had put to flight on many occasions was 
in the rank ahead of Shivaji. The Emperor 
put Shivaji in one of the back rows. Shivaji 
became angry. After all, he was the King 
of the sovereign State of Maharashtra 
and his status dema nded that he should 
51be in the front rank. This was a deliberate 
insult which he would not suffer lying down. Angry and insulted, he turned his back on the royal presence and made for his residence. He decided never to see the Emperor’s face again.
The visit was thus a failure. The news 
of the incident spread everywhere.
The Emperor’s Treachery : 
Aurangzeb ordered guards to be posted around Shivaji’s residence. Shivaji Maharaj and Sambhaji Raje thus became, for all practical purposes, the Emperor’s prisoners. Shivaji understood the Emperor’s treachery. He realised that the Emperor would never let him return to Maharashtra.
Days and weeks passed. Then, 
one  day, Shivaji Maharaj petitioned to the Emperor for permission to return to Maharashtra. He tried again and again, but every time his request was turned down. Then Shivaji Maharaj made up his mind to escape from the Emperor’s clutches, come what may. To begin with, he obtained the Emperor’s permission to send back to the South the persons who had accompanied him to Agra. The Emperor was happy. He thought that Shivaji Maharaj would now be completely isolated. The only persons left with him now were Sambhaji Raje and the two servants Hiroji Farjand and Madari Mehetar.
Soon after, Shivaji Maharaj 
pretended to be ill. He complained of severe pain in the stomach. Doctors were called. They started treating the patient. Shivaji started sending out huge baskets 
of sweets to Sadhus and Maulavis for his quick recovery.
Escape from Agra : In the beginning 
the guards outside would examine the baskets. In the course of time they got tired of this daily routine and stopped it. One evening Shivaji made Hiroji sleep in his bed and asked Madari to massage his feet. Then Shivaji Maharaj and Sambhaji Raje hid themselves in two of the many baskets that were going out. The baskets were supposed to contain sweets and allowed to pass unchecked. At a place previously fixed, Shivaji Maharaj and Sambhaji Raje got out of the baskets. Their faithful servants were waiting for them with horses kept ready for flight. In the meantime, Hiroji and Madari left the house in Agra under the pretext that they were going to the doctor to get some medicine. The two of them risked their own life and made a valuable contribution to the task of freeing Maharaj from imprisonment.
The Emperor came to know of 
Shivaji’s escape the next day. He was wild with rage. His Sardars were frightened. The Emperor sent spies all over the country to trace Shivaji. All the search, however, was in vain. Once escaped, the Maratha lion was never again caught in the Emperor’s net. In disguise, Shivaji Maharaj started towards Maharashtra. He left young Sambhaji Raje behind in a safe place at Mathura and in due course, reached Rajgad. Jijamata was overjoyed to see Shivaji safe and back home. Two 
52months later, Sambhaji Raje also arrived 
safely at Rajgad. In this way, with great skill and daring, Shivaji gave the slip to 
1.Fill in the blanks :
(a) Shivaji Maharaj attended the Emperor ’s
Darbar. It was Emperor Aurangzeb’s 
........... birthday.
 (fiftieth, fortieth, sixtieth)
(b) Shivaji Maharaj left young Sambhaji 
Raje behind in a safe place at ........... .
(Jhansi, Mathura, Delhi)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) To whom did Shivaji hand over the
administration of Swaraj before leaving for Agra ?
(b) Who were the only persons left with 
Shivaji in Agra ?
(c) What did Shivaji do for his quick 
recovery ?
Shivaji Maharaj escapes from Agra.
EXERCISESthe Emperor and returned to the safety of 
his Kingdom. This was in 1666. 
3.Give the answers in two or three sentences.
(a) Why did Shivaji leave the court of
Aurangzeb angrily ?
(b) What strategy did Shivaji use to escape 
from Agra ?
Activity
Paint / Prepare a scene depicting the incident of 
Shivaji’s escape from Agra.

53
Tanaji’s ResolveJijamata’s Wish :  The twenty-three 
forts which Shivaji handed over to Jaising 
were still in the hands of the Moghuls. 
Kondana was one of these twenty-three 
forts. One day Jijamata said to Shivaji, “Shivba, it is not safe to leave the strong Kondana fort in enemy hands. You must 
recapture it.” Shivaji was thinking on 
the same lines. He was very unhappy that Kondana was in Moghul hands. Both Shivaji and Jijabaisaheb were very unhappy about it. It was like a thorn in 
their side. Shivaji started making his 
plans for the recapture of Kondana. Who  14. The Fort is captured but the Lion is dead.
could be entrusted with this task  ? It was 
very difficult to capture Kondana. 
Tanaji Malusare : Tanaji was 
Shivaji’s comrade right from the beginning. He came from the village Umrathe near Mahad in the Konkan. He was ever ready to put his heart and soul into any work assigned to him by 
Shivaji. Tanaji was strong and well-built, 
and as clever as he was brave. He was passionately devoted to Shivaji.
Kondana’s Marriage First :  Tanaji 
was busy making preparations for his 
54
son Raiba’s wedding. Everyone in 
the house was busy with the marriage 
preparations. The marriage 
was only four days away. 
Tanaji thought that he 
would go and invite 
Shivaji Maharaj 
and Maasaheb 
to the wedding. 
Accompanied by 
Shelarmama, he 
Tanaji’s Assault on Kondanawent to Shivaji Maharaj to give him and 
Maasaheb his personal invitation to the wedding. On receiving the invitation from 
Shelarmama, Shivaji said, “Shelarmama, 
you go back and celebrate the wedding. I am sorry I shall be unable to attend. I have decided to lead a campaign for the 
recapture of Kondana.” 
As soon as Tanaji heard this he said, 
“Maharaj, do you propose to undertake 
this difficult and dangerous campaign 
while Tanaji is still alive ? Then what is 
the use of persons like me ? This will not do. I shall first perform the marriage of Kondana by capturing it. Raiba’s wedding can wait. You must allow me to lead this 
campaign and give me your blessings for 
its success.”
Tanaji’s Plan : With these words 
Tanaji took charge of the campaign and left 
for Kondana. The fort was then under the 
immediate control of Udaybhan, a Rajput 
officer appointed by 
Jaising. Udaybhan 
was a disciplined 
and vigilant 
officer. There 
were two 
entrances 
55to the fort. Both were heavily guarded by 
Udaybhan’s men. How then to mount an assault ? Tanaji quietly made a detailed 
inspection of the fort. On the western side 
there was a steep precipice where there were no guards. Tanaji decided to attack from that side. He explained his plan to 
his younger brother. He said, “You take a 
detachment of five hundred troops and try and reach the ‘Kalyan’ gate. With another three hundred I shall scale this precipice and get inside the fort. As soon as we are 
there, we shall throw open the doors of the 
‘Kalyan’ gate. Then you step in and join us. Together we shall destroy the Moghul troops defending the fort.” With the plan thus finalised, Suryaji and Tanaji went 
their different ways.
Over the Precipice and into the 
Fort   : It was a dark night. Tanaji and 
his men were gathered at the foot of the 
precipice. The sound of crickets could 
be heard all round. Five or six members 
of Tanaji’s party started to scale the precipice. It was indeed very high and steep. But somehow they managed to get a 
foothold in the rock, pulled themselves up 
by pushing their fingers into rock crevices and began the difficult and dangerous climb. Slowly but surely they reached the top. As soon as they were on safe ground, 
they tied a thick rope to a strong tree and 
let it down the precipice. The others took hold of the rope and climbed up to the top like monkeys.
Tanaji’s Valour :  By now Suryaji 
had reached the Kalyan gate. He waited there for the doors to open. The battle on the fort started. Udaybhan heard of the attack. The battle drum was sounded. Udaybhan’s garrison attacked Tanaji’s men. A grim battle started between the two 
forces in the light of dancing torches. The 
Mavlas opened the doors of the Kalyan gate. Tanaji was fighting like a brave lion. Udaybhan attacked him. Both were very brave and the battle between them 
was fierce. Tanaji’s shield was broken. 
So he tied his upper garment round his defending hand to parry Udaybhan’s blows and continued the fight. In the end 
both were mortally wounded and fell 
fighting.
The Fort is captured but the Lion 
is dead : With the death of Tanaji the 
Mavlas found themselves without a leader and began to retreat. By then Suryaji and his men had arrived on the scene of battle. Suryaji was deeply grieved to know that his brother was dead. But he had no time 
for grief. He had to continue the fight. He 
cut off the rope by which the Mavlas had climbed the fort. Then he stood in the path of the retreating Mavlas and said, “Don’t 
you see that your father is lying dead here 
on the battlefield ? Are you not ashamed to run away like a bunch of cowards
 ? Turn 
back and fight, for I have blocked your retreat by cutting off the rope by which 
you climbed up. The only choice before 
you is either to jump to your death over the precipice or to turn back and fight to destroy the enemy.”
So the Mavlas returned to the fight 
and attacked the enemy. A fierce battle raged. The Mavlas ultimately conquered 
56the fort but in the process had lost their 
brave and lion-hearted leader, Tanaji. Jijamata and Shivaji Maharaj heard the news. They were struck with grief. Shivaji Maharaj expressed his sorrow in a single sentence : “The fort is won but the lion is dead.” So Kondana became Sinhagad, in 
memory of the great warrior who gave his life to recapture it. This event took place in 1670. Later on, Shivaji Raje personally went to Umrathe and performed the wedding of Raiba.
EXERCISES
1.Colour the circle of the correct option.
(a) Tanaji was the resident of this place.
  (i) Mahad   (ii) Chiplun  
 (iii) Umrathe    (iv) Ratnagiri  
(b) Udaybhan, appointed by Jaising, was 
the chief of the ............... fort.
(i) Purandar  (ii) Kondana  
(iii) Raigad  (iv) Pratapgad  
(c) The name of Tanaji’s brother was :
(i) Raiba    (ii) Suryaji  
(iii) Murarbaji   (iv) Firangoji  
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) In whose hands was the Kondana fort   ?(b) What did Jijamata say to Shivaji about 
Kondana ?
(c) Who took charge of the campaign of 
Kondana ?
3.Write the answers in two or three
sentences.
(a) What did Shivaji say on receiving the
invitation from Shelarmama ?
(b) What did Suryaji say to the retreating 
Mavlas ?
Activity
Make a list of historical monuments in your 
area.

57
Why did Shivaji have himself 
crowned ? : Shivaji took the oath of 
Swaraj in the temple of Raireshwar. He 
had to face numerous difficulties and 
calamities in his efforts to win Swaraj 
for his people. But with great courage 
and skill Shivaji overcame them all. Swaraj had stepped out of its childhood 
and was growing fast. Men like Baji 
Prabhu, Murarbaji, Tanaji nursed it with 
their blood. The new Kingdom was both 
respected and feared.
With a view to having this kingdom 
recognized by all other princes in the land, big and small, Shivaji decided to 
have himself crowned. After hundreds of 
years, a king was born in Maharashtra 
who would treat all religions equally and 
give justice and happiness to his subjects. Shivaji decided to have himself crowned 
so that everyone would come to know 
that Swaraj had been firmly established. 
He did not do it for self-glorification or 
personal happiness. He did it to give the newly founded Swaraj a firm footing.
The Capital of Swaraj : Shivaji 
selected Raigad as the capital of his 
kingdom. Raigad was a strong hill fort 
from where it was easy to administer the 
kingdom and keep a watch on the enemy.
Shivaji Raje inspected his troops 
at Chiplun. He visited Pratapgad and 
took the goddess Bhavani’s ‘Darshan’. In grateful memory he presented to the 
temple a golden canopy for the goddess.15. A Memorable Ceremony
Preparations for the Coronation  : 
Then Shivaji Raje ordered a golden 
throne to be made and had it studded 
with precious stones. He put a white royal 
umbrella over the throne. Invitations to 
the coronation were sent out to princes 
and kings, learned Brahmins, all the Sardars under his command and other 
officers. Gagabhatt came from Varanasi 
to act as the chief priest at the ceremony. 
Gagabhatt originally belonged to Paithan 
but had settled down in Varanasi. He was a great and renowned scholar respected in 
Varanasi. 
Shivaji Maharaj made detailed 
preparations for the coronation. Men were 
sent out to bring waters of the seven rivers 
and the sea. Nearly fifty thousand people 
gathered at Raigad. Small tents, big tents, spacious shamianas to accommodate the 
guests could be seen everywhere.
The Coronation Ceremony :  The 
Coronation Day dawned. It was indeed the 
most auspicious day. Musicians began to 
play on their instruments. Singers began to 
sing, music and singing filled the air. There was an atmosphere of joy everywhere. 
Shivaji Raje sat on a golden seat in full 
regalia. A canopy (chhatra) and the fans 
(chamare) were held over his head. There 
were priests, each one carrying vessels of ghee, dahi and honey. Gagabhatt himself 
carried a gold vessel filled with the waters 
of the seven rivers, Ganga, Sindhu, 
Yamuna, Godavari, Krishna, Narmada 
58
The Coronation Ceremony
59and Kaveri and of the sea. Gagabhatt 
held the vessel over Shivaji’s head and started reciting the coronation mantras. From a hundred tiny holes in the vessel, water started dripping down on Shivaji’s head. After ablution by the sacred waters Shivaji Maharaj got up and bowed before Jijamata and touched her feet. Jijamata held him in close embrace. Her eyes were filled with tears of joy. Her thirty years’ efforts had at last borne fruit. The dream she had nursed even before Shivaji’s birth had at last come true. The tears in her eyes were tears of joy and fulfilment. Shivaji Maharaj was also deeply moved. Glory be to both of them !
After meeting Maasaheb, Shivaji 
Maharaj sat on the throne. Maharani Soyarabai and the Crown Prince Sambhaji  Raje sat next to him. His eight ministers stood on either side. Gagabhatt held the canopy lined with gold and pearl tassels 
over his head and said, “Victory be to Shiva Chhatrapati, now crowned King, the ornament of the race of warriors.” Everyone present followed suit and in one voice wished victory to Shivaji Maharaj. Guns were fired from fort after fort. The whole of Maharashtra echoed with one voice, “Shivaji Maharaj Ki Jai.” Shivaji’s coronation took place in 1674. From that year Shivaji Maharaj started a new calendar, the Coronation Calendar. He became a great king like those in whose name people start a new era. He struck his own coins. Some foreign envoys were present at the Coronation. The English had sent their envoy Oxinden with valuable presents. Subjects from far-off areas and places had also come to see this ceremony. The whole world came to know of the big event. Shivaji’s fame spread everywhere.
1.Fill in the blanks :
(a) Shivaji selected ...........  as the capital of 
his kingdom.
 (Sinhagad, Raigad, Panhalgad)
(b) Shivaji’s coronation took place in  
........... . 
(1674, 1675, 1647)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) The water of which seven rivers was
filled in the golden vessel ?
(b) What Calendar did Shivaji Maharaj 
start from the year of his Coronation ?
3. Write the answers in two or three sentences.
(a) Why did Shivaji Maharaj have himself
crowned ?
(b) Why did Shivaji select Raigad as the 
capital of his Kingdom ?(c) Why were Jijamata’s eyes filled with 
tears of joy ?
Activity
(a) From your teacher, obtain information 
about the coins that Shivaji Maharaj 
struck at the time of his Coronation.
(b) Make a collection of various postal 
stamps. Make an exhibition of them in your class with the help of your  
class-mates.
EXERCISES

60
16. Campaign in the South
Plan of Campaign : The coronation 
ceremony was over but its joy was short-
lived. A short while after the coronation, on 17 June 1674, Maasaheb passed away. While all his subjects looked upon Shivaji Maharaj as their protector, Shivaji Maharaj himself depended upon the advice and help of Maasaheb. She was the true guide and Guru in his life. He was deeply grieved at the loss of his mother. But he had very little time for sorrow because he had to administer the kingdom which he had established.
He decided to attack Karnatak. He 
was no longer afraid of Adilshah because the Kingdom of Bijapur was practically on its last legs. The real threat to Swaraj was from the North, for the Moghul Emperor Aurangzeb was bidding his time to destroy the Maratha Kingdom. There was no knowing when he would attack and swallow the new kingdom. Shivaji thought that this campaign would create a powerful base in the South from where he could resist the blows of the Moghuls. With this in view, he planned his Southern campaign. He approached Kutubshah of Golconda for help and the Shah readily agreed to give whatever help was needed.
There was yet another reason for 
the Campaign. Shivaji’s step-brother Vyankoji was looking after Shahaji Raje’s Tanjavur Jagir in the South. He would not give Shivaji his share of the 
ancestral Jagir. Neither did he display any love for Swaraj. He treated Shivaji with indifference. Shivaji thought that a personal meeting would resolve the dispute and Vyankoji could be persuaded to help in the work of Swaraj.
Visit to Golconda : Shivaji Maharaj 
started on his Southern campaign. Abulhasan Kutubshah of Golconda had invited him to visit Golconda. He, therefore, decided to visit Golconda first and then proceed with his conquest of the South.
Golconda was the capital of 
Kutubshah’s Kingdom. He made great preparations to receive Shivaji. A special shamiana was put up where the two would meet. As Shivaji entered the capital, people lined the streets to have his ‘Darshan’. Stories of his exploits were the talk of the whole country. People had heard of the death of Afzalkhan at his hands, of the discomfiture of Shaistakhan and of Shivaji’s miraculous escape from Agra. Because of this, Shivaji Maharaj received a royal welcome. People showered flower petals on him from the house-tops. Acknowledging this wonderful reception, Shivaji entered Kutubshah’s darbar. Kutubshah came down half-way to receive him. He seated Shivaji Maharaj alongside himself as an equal on a specially prepared throne. He left nothing undone as far as reception was concerned.
61
The Historic Visit of Shivaji Maharaj to Golconda
Conquest of Jinji : Taking leave 
of Kutubshah, Shivaji proceeded south 
and reached the east coast. To the south 
of Chennai is the fort of Jinji. It is a 
big fort, as big and strong as Raigad. Shivaji besieged and captured it. A strong Southern base was thus created for 
Swaraj. Then he besieged the Vellore fort. 
The siege lasted for several months but the fort could not be conquered. Shivaji had to train his guns on the fort from a neighbouring hill before he could conquer 
it. His southern campaign brought under 
his rule several forts and a territory with an annual revenue of twenty lakhs.Meeting with Vyankoji Raje :  
Shivaji Maharaj invited Vyankoji Raje, his step-brother, to meet him. Vyankoji 
Raje reluctantly agreed. Shivaji received 
him with great honour and tried to win him over. He appealed to Vyankoji Raje to help him in the work of Swaraj. 
For a few days, Vyankoji Raje stayed 
with Shivaji Maharaj but one night he returned to Tanjavur without even taking leave of Shivaji Maharaj. From Tanjavur he actually attacked Shivaji’s forces. 
Shivaji’s forces took heavy toll of the 
attacking troops and Vyankoji Raje was defeated. Shivaji Maharaj was deeply 
62pained at Vyankoji  Raje’s behaviour. He 
wrote to him and tried to persuade him to change his ways. He conferred on him the territory south of Jinji and set aside a small part of Karnatak as a gift for Deepabai, Vyankoji’s wife. He said in his letter to Vyankoji Raje, ‘Do not put your trust in your enemies. Follow the path of valour.’
After the conclusion of this successful 
campaign of Karnatak Shivaji returned to Raigad. While he was yet to overcome the strain of this campaign, he had to undertake a naval campaign against the  Siddi of Janjira. At this time, Maharaj was 
fifty years old. He had toiled continuously  for nearly thirty-five years, without any 
time to rest.
The People’s Protector Is No More  : 
On 3rd April, 1680, Shivaji Maharaj died, 
plunging his people into a sea of sorrow. The protector of people passed away.
In his lifetime, Maharaj achieved so 
many great things. He vanquished very powerful enemies and founded Hindavi Swaraj. There was none in the whole of 
India who could match his achievements. 
He was a great national figure.
lllShivaji Maharaj meets Vyankoji Raje.

63The following foot notes are applicable : (1) © Government of India, Copyright : 2014. (2) The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher. 
(3) The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate base line. (4) The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh. (5) The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are asinterpreted from the "North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act. 1971," but have yet to be verified. (6) The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with theRecord/Master Copy certified by Survey of India. (7) The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand and Chattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned. (8) The spellings of names in this map, have been taken from various sources.

64
The Samadhi of Shivaji Maharaj - Raigad1.Fill in the blanks :
(a) Vyankoji Raje was looking after
Shahaji Raje’s .......... Jagir in the 
South. 
(Vellore, Tanjavur, Bangalore)
(b) The capital of Kutubshah’s kingdom 
was .......... .
(Delhi, Jinji, Golconda)
2.Write the answer in one sentence.
(a) Why did Shivaji Maharaj want to meet
Vyankoji Raje ?
(b) What appeal was made by Shivaji 
Maharaj to Vyankoji Raje ?(c) What did Shivaji Maharaj say in his 
letter to Vyankoji Raje ?
3.Give reasons.
(a) Shivaji Maharaj planned a campaign
of the South.
(b) Shivaji Maharaj wrote to Vyankoji 
Raje and tried to persuade him to change his ways.
Activity
Dramatize the conversation between Shivaji 
Maharaj and Vyankoji Raje at their meeting.
EXERCISES

65Shivaji Maharaj conquered many 
enemies to establish his Swaraj. Be it 
war or governance, his management skill 
can be seen in all areas. Let us learn 
about the management skills of Shivaji Maharaj in this lesson.
Do you know?
l What is management skill?
Management skill means working 
in a disciplined manner, on a task one 
has undertaken to achieve a definite goal.
The management skills of Shivaji 
Maharaj are seen at all times in the battles 
he fought all his life and also in his overall 
administration. Let us look at a few 
examples :
Building Forts
Shivaji Maharaj protected his Swaraj 
with the help of forts. In the book  
‘Aadnyaapatra’ or ‘Royal Edict ’, the 
importance of forts has been aptly 
summed up as follows : ‘The essence of 
the whole kingdom is forts’. Shivaji 
Maharaj had roamed through the 
Sahyadri ranges in his youth. On  
countless occasions, he had gazed at the 
forts situated in the Sahyadri. He had 
understood the importance of forts in the 
protection of Swaraj.
Shivaji Maharaj built all three types 
of forts - forest forts, hill forts and sea 
forts. A sea fort is also known as  ‘Janjira’. He employed experts like Hiroji 
Indulkar and Arjoji Yadav to build many 
new forts like Rajgad, Pratapgad and 
Sindhudurg. He repaired some old forts 
like Vijaydurg, Torana and Rangna and built the new fort of Raigad. He had 
about 300 forts.
You can do this.
l In the Diwali vacation, construct 
the model of a fort with the help of 
your friends.
- List the materials you will need 
to build the fort.
- Choose a suitable place.
- Prepare a blueprint to show the 
arrangements for houses and water.Do you know?
l It is believed that the book  
‘Aadnyaapatra’ was written by Ramchandrapant Amatya at the order of Chhatrapati Rajaram Maharaj, the younger son of Shivaji Maharaj.
Can you tell?
l  Name a fort or cave-sculpture in your locality.
l What articles / buildings can be 
seen on it?
l What type of fort is it?
17. Management of Forts and the Navy
66Management of Forts
Shivaji Maharaj had made definite 
arrangements for the protection of forts.
On each fort, the officers Killedar, Sabnis and Karkhanis were appointed. 
The Sabnis and Karkhanis worked under the Killedar. Their work is shown in the chart below.
Building a Fort
Killedar (Havaldar)
Sabnis Karkhanisl	To protect and administer the fort.
l	To issue orders to the Sabnis and Karkhanis.
l	To follow government orders, instructions and letters.
l	To keep accounts (Record income 
and expenses on the fort).
l	To collect revenue / tax from the subjects on the fort and around it.
l	To handle the correspondence.l	Supply grains and goods to the people 
living on the fort.
l	To arrange for the ammunition for the guns and firearms at the time of war.
l	To look after and maintain the fort 
and the buildings on it.
67
Shivaji Maharaj inspecting the navyDiscuss :
l The guns on the fort were given 
a coating of wax.
Can you tell?
l  Name the types of the vessels in   
 Shivaji Maharaj’s navy, for    
 example, gurab, galbat, pal,   
 machwa, nav, hodi (boat).
 l Name the ships in the Navy  
of Independent India.   Guns and Ammunition
At the time of Shivaji Maharaj, guns 
(cannons) of various sizes were used to 
protect the forts from the enemy. The guns were placed on the bastions and fortifications of the fort. Some forts like Purandar and Bhimgad had provisions for making guns. Guns were made from metals like iron, brass, copper, etc. In  the rainy season, the guns were given      a wax-coating to prevent rusting. Iron    and stone cannonballs and canister    shots were fired at the enemy from the guns. To fire the shots, an explosive mixture was used.The Navy
A navy consists of warships. The 
English, the Portuguese, the Siddis and the 
Dutch had a strong naval force. Some of these people used to plunder the villages 
68on the sea coast and torture the villagers. 
Shivaji Maharaj created an independent navy to permanently subdue these enemies on the sea.
Shivaji Maharaj raised several 
dockyards to build ships of various sizes. He gained control over old sea forts by 
winning them in battles. He repaired sea 
forts like Suvarnadurg and Vijaydurg. He built a new sea fort called Sindhudurg on the Kurte island near Malvan. He also built the fort of Khanderi near Mumbai.
The Swaraj navy included people 
belonging to various sea-faring communities like Koli, Bhandari, and Agari. Daulatkhan, Maynak Bhandari, Lai Patil,  Daryasarang, Tukoji Angre were some of the great men of his period, skilled in naval warfare.
Because of the Maratha navy, the 
English, the Portuguese, the Siddis and 
the Dutch who were the enemies of the 
Marathas began to fear and respect them. Their nuisance to Swaraj was reduced. By raising an independent and strong navy, Shivaji Maharaj defined his territorial waters and established domination over the coastal area. He 
safeguarded his sea-coast. This navy was 
the first of its kind in medieval India. That is why he is rightly regarded as the ‘Father of the Indian Navy’.
Intelligence Department : There 
was a well-organized and very efficient system of army intelligence and espionage. Bahirji Naik was the chief of 
this branch. The accurate information that he obtained helped greatly in making 
the campaigns like the Surat campaign 
successful. Shivaji’s spies found out 
detailed information about the enemy 
camp. Shivaji Maharaj started no offensive unless he had gathered 
information from his spies. That is how 
he planned his campaigns.  
Guerilla Tactics : In the defence 
strategy of Shivaji Maharaj, guerilla 
tactics were especially important. 
Guerilla tactics include sudden and 
unexpected attacks on the enemy at a 
strategic place and time. The guerilla army attacks the enemy, and without 
giving them time to recover, reaches a 
safe destination. Shivaji Maharaj was 
helped by the dense forests and hill forts 
in the Sahyadris and the support of his 
subjects in this guerill a warfare.
Do you know?
l  Shivaji Maharaj had a disciplined 
army. His soldiers treated women with respect. Shivaji Maharaj, therefore, came to be known as the protector of 
women. He had strictly warned his 
soldiers not to drink alcohol, not to trouble his subjects and not to extort money from them.
Do you know?
l A few of the associates of Shivaji 
Maharaj - Kanhoji Jedhe, Veer Baji 
Pasalkar, Firangoji Narsala, Prataprao Gujar, Sidhoji Nimbalkar and Siddi Hilal.
691.Can you tell these names?
(a) The book which tells us about the
importance of forts .................. .
(b) Another name for sea forts .......... .
2.Write what you feel.
(a) Shivaji Maharaj is rightly called the
‘Father of the Indian Navy’.
(b) Areas in which we can see Shivaji 
Maharaj’s management skills.
3.Write two of the things that these
officers did.
(a) Killedar   1. ..............  2. ................
(b) Sabnis    1. ..............  2. ................
(c) Karkhanis  1. ..............  2. ................
Exercise
4.Show the following on an outline map
of Maharashtra.
(a) Fort Sindhudurg  (b) Vijaydurg
(c) Mumbai   (d) Pratapgad
5.Which aspect of Shivaji Maharaj ’s
management skills did you like the
most? How will you use it in your
daily routine?
Activity :
(a) Present a play in the classroom on 
the subject of ‘An interview with 
Shivaji Maharaj ’.
(b) Obtain information about the 
warships in the Indian Navy.
(c) Visit different types of forts and find 
out the names of the various places 
on it.

70
18.  Management of the Welfare State of Swaraj
Shivaji Maharaj struggled long 
against many unjust powers. They were 
the Adilshahi and Moghul powers, the Portuguese, and the Siddis of Janjira. That is how an independent Hindavi Swaraj was created.
For smooth working, Shivaji Maharaj 
divided the administration into eight departments. He appointed a Minister in 
charge of each. This was his famous 
council of eight ministers. The Swaraj of 
Shivaji Maharaj was a State run for the welfare of the people in the true sense of the term. It was run with the assistance of 
the eight ministers. Shivaji Maharaj 
himself made the appointments of these Can you tell?
l Name the various powers that 
Shivaji Maharaj fought. 
People lived happily in the Swaraj 
created by Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. 
Therefore, the qualities of confidence, self-respect and patriotism strongly emerged among the people of Maharashtra.
The Council of Eight Ministers
Name of the Minister Designation Department
1. Moro Trimbak Pingle Pradhan Administration (Political)
2. Ramchandra Nilkanth MuzumdarAmatya Revenue and Accounts of the State
3. Hambirrao Mohite Senapati Defence
4. Moreshwar Panditrao Panditrao Religious Matters
5. Niraji Rawaji Nyayadhish Justice
6. Annaji Datto Sachiv Government Orders
7. Dattaji Trimbak Waknis Mantri Correspondence
8. Ramchandra Trimbak DabirSumant Foreign RelationsDo you know?
Food, clothing and shelter are the 
basic necessities of life. In a welfare 
State, these needs of people are satisfied. 
Women are honoured. Common people, 
peasants are not deceived. Injustice is 
not done to anyone. Justice is dispensed 
quickly. Agriculture and industries 
develop well. Folk arts flourish. People 
can live a happy, contented life.eight ministers and other important 
officers on the basis of their eligibility 
and merit. He supervised all their work. 
71Shivaji distributing pairs of oxen and other basic necessities
Something for you to do.
l	Copy the ‘Royal Edict for the 
Protection of Environment’ given in 
this textbook in big and beautiful letters and make a chart. Read it aloud in the classroom.
	
Protection of Environment 
‘Natural environment’ includes the 
land in nature, as also factors like air, rain, rivers and streams, seas, forests, the birds and animals, light received from 
the sun, etc. It is beneficial for man to 
make use of this environment only to 
meet his necessities.  
Shivaji Maharaj took precautions to 
avoid the destruction of these 
environmental factors.Shivaji Maharaj saw to it that the 
forests in his kingdom would not be destroyed by the people. From the ‘Royal Edict’, we can see that he had issued 
many orders like the following : For the 
navy, it is necessary to build boats and 
ships of various sizes and their beams, masts, oars, etc., for which wood is required. To obtain this wood, only teak trees should be cut. If more teakwood is required, it should be purchased from foreign territories. But on no account should mango, jackfruit or other trees be cut. They don’t grow in a year or two. People look after them like their own children in order to grow them. Cutting them is to inflict sorrow on the people. It should not be done. Even when a tree is greatly worn out, it should be cut only 
after paying the owner and getting  
his consent.
72Water Management
Shivaji Maharaj had various bunds 
built near the villages in Swaraj, to make 
drinking water available to the people. 
Canals were dug out to make water 
available for agriculture. Due to this, 
there was an increase in the produce. 
People in Swaraj never felt the severity of droughts. During the regime of Shivaji Always remember !
‘World Environment Day ’ is 
celebrated every year on 5th June, to 
emphasize the importance of conserving 
and protecting the environment.Protection of Environment
Maharaj, the number of people living on 
forts was quite large. Shivaji Maharaj 
took care to make proper arrangements 
for water on the forts. Before building a 
fort, the place was inspected to see 
whether enough water was available 
there. In case it didn’t have water, tanks 
and reservoirs were built there, before the onset of the rainy season, and rainwater 
was stored in them.
The stored water was used 
economically. Due to such water 
management, people on the forts and 
other subjects in Swaraj did not suffer 
from shortage of water even during drought periods.

73
Shivaji Maharaj made arrangements for drinking water and irrigation by constructing bunds and canals
Can you tell?
l  Why should we use water 
economically ?
l Name a dam or lake situated near 
your village or locality.
l What is water management?
l What are the government schemes 
for water management?
l  The Government has started the 
project ‘Jalyukt Shivar ’ to make     
Maharashtra a drought free State.Do you know?
Drought Relief
Shivaji Maharaj gave various 
facilities to drought-affected peasants. 
He used to waive taxes. So the severity of drought was reduced for people in Swaraj. 
In a drought year, Shivaji Maharaj 
distributed the grain stored in the State 
granaries free of cost to the people. He 
also undertook repairs of various forts 
and construction of dams, bunds and 
canals during drought years. This way, 
peasants and artisans or balutedars could 
earn their daily living and did not feel the 
severity of drought. 
As the peasant became wealthy, he 
could afford to buy things like footwear, 
clothes, etc. This provided work to the 
artisans. Those who were homeless till 
then, developed the capacity to build their own houses. This in turn provided 
work to the masons, the carpenters, the 
blacksmiths, the brick-makers. This is 
how, along with the peasants in Swaraj, 
artisans also become happy and wealthy.
74Sea Trade and other Markets
Shivaji Maharaj raised his own 
independent Navy in order to protect his 
Swaraj well and to establish his rule over 
the sea adjoining Swaraj. But that was 
not all. He also had special cargo ships built to promote trade in Swaraj. He 
developed trade ports like Rajapur. He 
built a special market on Raigad. He started a separate market place at Khed Shivapur near Pune. He developed 
marketplaces in big towns and roadside 
villages. A new ‘peth’ or settlement was established at Pashan near Pune by the 
orders of Veermata Jijabai. It was  
referred to as ‘Jijapur’.
Shivaji Maharaj levied more taxes 
on goods imported from the outside 
regions to promote trade within Swaraj. 
He levied more tax on the salt produced 
in the Portuguese territory, which made it 
costlier. On the other hand, he reduced the tax on the salt produced in Swaraj so 
that people could buy it at a cheaper rate. Naturally, it led to an increase in the trade of salt produced in Swaraj. Thus, 
local trade was encouraged.
Shivaji Maharaj made efforts for the 
growth of trade and industries in Swaraj. 
He personally made sure that his subjects would not be cheated by the merchants in any way. When he came to know that people are being cheated in the coconut and betelnut trade in Konkan, he warned the Subhedar of that region.
High Regard for Women 
Shivaji Maharaj had ordered that the 
women and children in the enemy camp 
were not to be harmed in any way during 
the period of war. In fact, they were to be treated with great respect. The behaviour of Shivaji Maharaj on several occasions, 
set the ideal of how women were to be 
treated.
The Maratha army had marched 
upon Belawadi in Karnataka to vanquish 
the fortress there. Mallamma Desai, a brave woman, fought a great battle in defence of the fortress. When Shivaji Maharaj came to know about her courage, he called her his younger sister, returned her fortress and villages to her with honour and gave her the title ‘Savitri’. 
Vigilance Regarding Cleanliness
During the regime of  Shivaji 
Maharaj, measures were taken to 
maintain better cleanliness in homes and in public places. He issued orders telling people to make a fence of the nirgudi bush around the house to prevent the entry of animals like mice, scorpions, insects and ants.  Fumigation was also suggested to destroy the germs that are harmful to health.
People were warned not to leave 
garbage lying on the roads and markets on the fort. If garbage piled up in various places in spite of all this, it was not to be 
thrown down the fort. It was to be burnt 
on the spot and the ashes were to be used 
as manure for vegetables grown in 
backyards.Can you tell?
l  Name the market in your village /  
 locality.
l  How did the market acquire that     
 name?     
75Shivaji Maharaj’s management of 
forts, guns and firearms, his navy,  
protection of the environment, water management, sea trade, markets, cleanliness and hygiene is a guiding force for us even today. 
Hindavi Swaraj
Hindavi Swaraj was a dream of 
Shivaji Maharaj. Anyone who lived in 
Hindustan, no matter to what religion or community they belonged, was a ‘Hindavi’. Their raj was ‘Hindavi Swaraj’.
Religious Tolerance  
The religious policy of Shivaji 
Maharaj was liberal. In his campaigns, 
he never caused any harm to mosques. If he came across a copy of the Quran 
Shivaji Maharaj honours Mallamma Desai of Belawadi
Sharif, he would respectfully pass it on to the Muslims. He never hated Muslims simply because they were Muslims. If a person who had changed his religion wished to return to his original religion, Shivaji always helped him. His brother-in-law, Bajaji Naik Nimbalkar, was in the service of Adilshah of Bijapur. Adilshah made him accept the Muslim faith. Bajaji made Bijapur his home. He lacked for nothing but he was unhappy that he had changed his religion. One day, he made up his mind to come back to his own religion. Shivaji Maharaj welcomed him back in his religion. The story of Netoji Palkar is similar. His religion had been changed but he wished to return to his original faith. Shivaji Maharaj accepted him back into his religion.
76Bring to memory, the wonderful image of Shivaji Maharaj ...l Shivaji Maharaj had great respect for 
saints and holy men. He honoured 
temples. He also gave protection to 
masjids. He respected both the Bhagavad 
Geeta and the Quran Sharif. He gave 
protection to Christian churches also. He 
honoured learned men. Paramanand, 
Gagabhatt, Dhundiraj, Bhushan and 
other learned men received his patronage. 
He bestowed great honour on Sant 
Tukaram, Samarth Ramdas, Baba Yakut 
and Mauni Baba.Do you know?
Remember Him :   Shivaji was a 
torch-bearer in the dark night of slavery; 
a fighter who got the better of all difficult situations; who slowly but surely increased his strength while giving fight to powerful enemies; who encouraged his comrades and fooled his opponents and, in the end, achieved his goal. He was a model son, a cautious leader, a skilled organizer, a benevolent administrator, a clever military strategist, a great warrior, a terror to the wicked, a defender of the good, and an epoch maker. When one sees all these brilliant facets of his personality one cannot but say to oneself : 
“Bring to memory his wonderful 
image and remember his great achievements.”
771. Give reasons.
(a) An independent Hindavi Swaraj was
created.
(b) The people in Swaraj did not feel the
severity of drought.
(c) Shivaji Maharaj honoured
Mallamma Desai.
2. Fill in the blanks to complete the table.
Activity :
(a) Hold a market in the premises of your
school.List the various goods and their
prices. Visit the local market to do that.Name of the Minister Designation Department
1. Moro Trimbak Pingle …………. Administration (Political)
2. ……………… Amatya Revenue and Accounts of the State
3. Hambirrao Mohite Senapati ………….
4. Moreshwar Panditrao …………. Religious Matters
5. ……………… Nyayadhish ………….
6. Annaji Datto …………. ………….
7. ……………… …………. Correspondence
8. Ramchandra Trimbak DabirSumant ………….3. Discuss :
How did Shivaji Maharaj ensure that the
various factors in the environment wouldnot get destroyed? What are the things
that you can do to protect the environment?
4. Read and tell.
Read the information on ‘water
management’ and tell it in your ownwords.
(b) What trees have been planted in the
neighbourhood of your school ? What
do you do to conserve them?
Exercise

78
‘Royal Edict’ for the 
Protection of Environment
Ramchandrapant Amatya wrote ‘Adnya-patra’ 
(Royal Edict) which reflects the policies of Shivaji 
Maharaj. The following passage elucidates his 
attitude towards environment. 
“For ships of the navy are necessary planks, 
beams, masts and such other limbs of wood. With 
royal permission useful parts of teak and other 
trees which are in the forests of the kingdom 
should be cut and collected. Besides this, 
whatever is necessary should be purchased and 
brought from foreign territories. Wood of mango 
tree, jack tree, and other trees growing in one’s 
own kingdom are useful for building naval ships 
but they should not be touched. For these trees are 
not grown in a year or two. People have grown 
these trees by looking after them as after their 
children and by protecting them. If those trees 
are cut there will be no limit to their grief. One 
says that would one achieve one’s object causing 
grief to another, then the temporary advantage 
resulting to the doer of the work is ultimately lost 
completely. Nay, the king incurs the sin causing 
trouble to the people. In the absence of these trees 
there is even loss. For these reasons these things 
should not be allowed to happen. Even when a tree is greatly worn out and is of no use, then by getting the consent of its owner and by paying 
him for it, it should be cut without displeasing 
him. Force should not at all be used.”
(The above translation by Prof. S.V.Puntambekar is taken from 
‘AmkmnÌ’ Ed. Dr A. R. Kulkarni, Diamond Publications, 2007.)
79
The fort of Jinji is currently in the State of Tamil Nadu. Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj conquered 
this fort in his campaign of the South. This fort had always been strong and difficult to win. Even so 
Maharaj demolished the earlier fortifications and made the fort stronger by building new fortifications   
and  watch towers. Shahaji Raje had trained him at a young age in making forts unassailable or 
difficult to win. It is seen that Shivaji Maharaj made use of that knowledge on this occasion. Later on, Rajaram Maharaj established his capital on this fort. The Moghuls beseiged the fort when he was there. But Rajaram Maharaj fought for nearly seven years defending the fort in a state of seige. He could stay safe in the fort for such a long period because Shivaji Maharaj had the foresight to make the fort even stronger.The Upper Fort at Fort Jinji
Fort Rajgad
80Bhavanidevi - Pratapgad

